P. 1

CHAPTER 1: Introduction
====================

P. 1 / P. 2

[blank]

P. 2 / P. 3

Introduction

Ctenocystoids (e.g., Gilcidia) were very small, depressed, and almost bilateral animals that inhabited seabeds 540–350 million years ago with a worldwide distribution. These organisms are so different from other known fossils that they were assigned the taxonomic rank of Class. Among extant echinoderms, five Classes can be distinguished, although the number of extinct Classes can be estimated, depending on the author, at around twenty. All extant echinoderms exhibit radial symmetry, which may be secondarily masked. The arrangement of their organs in a pentameric pattern and the possession of a dermal skeleton in which each ossicle or plate is formed by a calcite crystal are primitive characteristics found in their ancestors. Another primitive characteristic of these animals is the transformation of one of their body cavities into a system of fluid-filled tubes with extensions that protrude to the outside and are capable of movement when inflated; this system is known as the aquifer vascular system.

However, for a century and a half, very ancient marine fossils have been known that exhibit this type of skeleton, but they lack any radial symmetry, and some also lack this vascular system. The body of these animals is oblong and fruit-shaped, which is why they are known as Carpoids. They inhabited the seabed from about 570 million years ago to about 370 million years ago, so their remains are found in rocks of this age. Currently, five major groups of carpoids are known; four of them have been known since the end of the last century.

P. 3

The Soluta (e.g., Dendrocystoides) have a globose, asymmetrical, somewhat flattened head with a posterior tail and an anterior arm. The head skeleton is composed of thin, irregularly arranged polygonal plates. Some have a gill slit located on the left side of the head. The anterior arm has a water-bearing vascular system. They lived from the Cambrian to the Devonian, and most of them can be considered chordates.

P. 4

Cornuta (e.g., Cothurnocystis) have a flattened head with a highly asymmetrical contour and a bilaterally symmetrical hind tail. They probably derived from Soluta after losing their anterior arm. They have several gill slits on the left side of the head. Only in the most primitive are remains of the water-bearing vascular system visible. Their fossils are known from rocks of Cambrian and Ordovician age.

Mitrata (e.g., Peltocystis) have a bilateral head and tail. The head internally displays a high degree of asymmetry, most notably the secondary formation of right gill slits. They lack a water vascular system. All known Mitrata can be assigned to each of the three Chordate subphyla. Their fossils are known from rocks of Ordovician-Carboniferous age.

Cincta (e.g., Trochocystites) were the first known carpoids and also the first to be recorded
from Spain (de Prado, Verneuil, and Barrande 1856). They are shaped like a tennis racket with a depressed, discoidal body and a posterior tail. At the anterior end is the mouth flanked by the only two branches of its water vascular system; extant echinoderms have five in a radial arrangement. Frontally, they have a gill slit covered by an operculum. Cincta are found in rocks of Cambrian age. They probably descended from the more primitive Soluta.

P. 4 / P. 5

The fifth group of carpoids, the Ctenocystoids,
was discovered just thirty years ago, and until almost a decade ago, only a single species was known. Their fossils have been found in Cambro-Ordovician rocks, and although they may be locally abundant, they can be classified as very rare. The existing level of knowledge about these animals is very low; only alpha-taxonomic studies have been undertaken, as well as preliminary studies in which some proposals were made about their structure and function. Among the factors that have hindered their study are:

* The small number of known species: between 1969 and 1984, only one species was described, in 1992, five (the year this doctoral thesis officially began), and six in 1995.

* The small number of fossils found and their geographical dispersion, which affects both fieldwork and the storage of specimens in institutions.

* The fragmentation and dispersal of their anatomical remains. The skeleton has usually been disarticulated and its elements dispersed. Furthermore, they often appear as external casts in which the original skeleton is missing, so replicas must be made in plastic materials.

* Their very small size: they were organisms with a total length of between 2.5 and 6 mm. When found fragmented, their parts have lengths of around a hundred micrometers; however, despite their size, macropaleontological techniques must be used.

* The novelty of their morphological plan and, therefore, the lack of tradition in its study, in order to compare them with other, better-known animals.

P. 5 / P. 6

Objectives

The purpose of this doctoral thesis was to deepen our understanding of Ctenocystoids, one of the least-known extinct animal groups and about which the least has been written.

As a starting point, the fossils will be studied, understanding the shape of each skeletal element as well as the disarticulation patterns of its parts, and then a three-dimensional reconstruction of all the studied species will be undertaken. Once the structure of each of them is known, the taxonomic study of the group will be undertaken; phylogenetic relationships will be explored, both external (with other already known groups) and internal (among ctenocystoid species). The mechanical structure of these organisms will be reconstructed, the possibilities of movement between their parts and the ability to propel masses of water will be analyzed, in an attempt to understand the adaptive capacities of these organisms.

Development of the work carried out: methodology, adaptation of the proposed partial objectives, and their integration

The dynamic nature of the research carried out has forced us to continually modify the initially proposed objectives. The novelty of studies on Ctenocystoids is evident from the existing literature: the basic knowledge of these organisms is captured in approximately thirty pages distributed across seven papers, practically reduced to an alpha-taxonomic state (RoBISON and SPRINKLE 1969, SPRINKLE and ROBISON 1978, DELL, BURRET, and BANKS 1985, FATKA and KORDULE 1985, UBAGHS 1987, UBAGHS and ROBISON 1988, and DZIK and ORLOWSKY 1995) and to some functional indications of a single species (ROBISON and SPRINKLE 1969, SPRINKLE and ROBISON 1978).

P. 6 /

Within this framework, and as an elementary starting point for subsequent studies, we aimed to obtain a detailed three-dimensional representation of each of the known Ctenocystoid taxa. The immediate objective of this phase of the research was, obviously, to reconstruct the skeleton of these animals and then fully reconstruct them.

/ P. 7

We began this work with the simultaneous reconstruction of two species: Ctenocystis utahensis (RoBísoN and SPRINKLE 1969) and Pembrocystis gallica nov. gen. nov. sp., as both represented extreme taphonomic cases that were ideal for understanding the group.

Almost all of the fossil specimens of CL utahensis are articulated, allowing us to understand the three-dimensional arrangement of the skeletal elements: this is their great advantage. However, unfortunately, they do not allow us to study the internal surfaces of their plates, as these remain hidden from the observer. For this purpose, and prior to this doctoral thesis, a scale model of Ctenocystites utahensis was prepared at The Natural History Museum, as was previously done with Placocystites forbesianus (Mitrata; Jefferies and Lewis 1976). This model was made by assembling sheets of expanded polyurethane (styrofoam) obtained by redrawing the various polished sections of a spathized specimen to scale. These scale models of the ossicles were subsequently mounted by the author, and during this operation, clues about the internal anatomy were detected that were later corroborated in other species. Another serious disadvantage of the Ctenocystites utahensis fossils, despite their magnificent general appearance, is the lack of microstructural details, which prevents any type of histological study.

Furthermore, the Pembrocystis gallica specimens are completely disarticulated; to the point that the animal's general outline is completely unrecognizable, and its reconstruction took just over a year. However, the great advantage that Pembrocystis fossils offer for understanding the group is that they show surfaces that have not been observed in other species, as well as excellent histological preservation.

P. 7 / P. 8

Once we understood the skeletal structure of both species, both from an anatomical and microscopic organographic perspective, we continued reconstructing the remaining species one by one, integrating the data for each species into a general model that aids in the identification of parts when they are disaggregated, completing information not directly or immediately accessible. The practical procedure for this comparative study consisted of capturing the three-dimensional structure of their skeletons on paper using orthogonal rules. Additional difficulties in this phase of the study were understanding the structure of three species, since these, by presenting body plans very different from those of Ctenocystis and Pembrocystis, turned out to be innovations to the preliminary (e.g., the published) concept of Ctenocystoidea and therefore required an ad hoc taxonomic status.

Previous taxonomy of Ctenocystoidea:
----------------------------------------------------
Class Ctenocystoidea Robison & Sprinkle, 1969
  Order Ctenocystida Ubaghs & Robison, 1988
    Family Ctenocystidae Sprinkle & Robison, 1978
      genus Ctenocystis Robison & Sprinkle, 1969
        Ct. utahensis Robison & Sprinkle, 1969
        Ct. jagoi Jell et al. 1985
        Ct. smithi Ubaghs, 1987
        Ct. colodon Ubaghs & Robison, 1988
      genus Etoctenocystis Fatka & Kordule, 1985
        E. bohemica Fatka & Kordule, 1985
  (without explicit adherence to any order)
    Family Jugoszoviidae Dzik & Orłowski, 1995
      genus Jugoszovia Dzik & Orłowski, 1995
        J. archaeocyathoides Dzik & Orłowski, 1995

The taxonomy of Ctenocystoidea has been characterized by the monotypy of the class for sixteen years (Ctenocystis utahensis), followed by a period of reference comparison with this species. The difficulty of studying the fossils of these animals and the apparent similarity between their species is evident when reading the diagnoses of the different taxa: a significant example is the existence of similar criteria for grouping four species in the genus Ctenocystis and for maintaining Etoctenocystis as an independent genus, since the basic difference between the latter and the former is an artifact. Given this situation, a taxonomic revision of the group was necessary to properly establish the characteristics of each taxon in a coherent system that could appropriately include the new species described in this work.

P. 8 / P. 9

Among the most significant contributions to the taxonomic framework prior to this doctoral thesis is the proposal of four orders
that designate groups with distinctive morphological patterns. Their study and differentiation has been based on detailed anatomical studies as well as on aspects of the interpretation of their biomechanical and hydrodynamic behavior. The exploration of the functional characteristics of these organisms has relied primarily on the paradigm method and the extensive use of techniques and methods perhaps more appropriate to the field of engineering than to zoology; in this regard, the author's technical training in sanitary engineering has been of great assistance.

The knowledge acquired about the mechanical design of these organisms—clearly not in a teleological sense but rather in an evolutionary and adaptive sense—has allowed us to further differentiate the meaning of each of the four morphological patterns, reinforcing the proposed taxa with new characteristics and thus allowing us to begin to consider their relationship with other organisms. At this point, we considered the need to properly establish, using objective criteria, the relationships between the taxa studied within the framework of phylogenetic systematics. The objective in this phase of the study was to establish natural, i.e., monophyletic groups and understand the relationships between them. To this end, different cladistic techniques were used. This study, moreover, was concomitant with the characterization of the evolutionary hypotheses for the different structures or adaptive strategies exhibited by the different taxa.

In parallel with the development of this doctoral thesis, research was carried out on closely related fossil and extant groups, covering, among others, Crinoidea, Blastoidea, Cystoidea, Cincta, Soluta (unpublished), Helicoplacoidea (unpublished), Cornuta, and Mitrata among the fossils, and Crinoidea, Asteroidea, Ophiuroidea, Holothuroidea, and Echinoidea among the extant ones. under aspects as different as nomenclature, taxonomy, phylogeny, biogeography, fauna, biostratigraphy, paleosynecology, function, morphology, morphometry and anatomy.

P. 9 / P. 10

This multidisciplinary and pluritaxonomic perspective has allowed us to develop a broad understanding of the group under study, encompassing the various problems inherent to its study and allowing us to address all the preliminary objectives as well as those that arose as a result of the development of the study of Ctenocystoids. The in-depth knowledge acquired by this group in itself justifies this doctoral thesis. Furthermore, its paleobiological perspective has allowed for the updating and progress in both the mechanistic-anatomical and evolutionary reconstruction of these small and little-known organisms that inhabited the Paleozoic seas.

P. 10 / P. 11

CHAPTER 2: Phylogenetic framework
=============================

P. 11 / P. 12

[blank]

P. 12 / P. 13

For a long time, deuterostomes (superphylum Deuterostomia) were considered a group composed of a relatively large number of phyla, contrasting with the protostomes. Among the phyla traditionally included among the deuterostomes are the Pogonophora, Chaetognata, Echinodermata, Chordata, Hemichordata, and even the lophophorates. Currently, there is a general consensus that only the phyla Echinodermata, Chordata, and Hemichordata are considered deuterostomes, or at least as deuterostomes s. str.

Since the discovery of the Pogonophora (phylum Pogonophora Beklemishev, 1944), their phylogenetic position has been severely disputed, with disparate proposals placing them among the protostomes or the deuterostomes. The deuterostome status of Pogonophorans was initially proposed based on the study of fragments of the anterior end of their bodies. This was often the iconography of textbooks prior to 1964, which emphasized the tripartite nature of their bodies. However, the protostome status of these organisms was well established after the study of complete individuals that retained the posterior end of the body (WEBB 1964), as well as by their embryology. Recent phylogenetic analyses based on the 185 rRNA sequence allow them to be considered protostomes (FIELDet et al. 1988; LAKE 1990; VALENTINE 1997). On the other hand, a recent proposal based on the sequencing of the coding region of the elongation factor 1a (DNA sequencing) considers them, along with the equiurids, as a phylum derived from annelids (McHuNGH 1997), thus reviving previous opinions based on their morphology and embryology (SOUTHWARD 1975, VAN DER LANO and NORREvANG 1975).

P. 13 /

In this sense, another group of interest is the sipunculids, which Nicholas 1967 associated with echinoderms based on the similarity of the sipunculid hydrostatic system to the echinoderm vascular-aquifer system, as well as the structure of the tuft of tentacles, which were similar to a lophophore. Among other works, LAKE 1990 and VALENTINE 1997 clearly consider sipunculids to be protostomes.

/ P. 14

The Chaetognatha present even more difficulties in assigning them to deuterostomes than the Pogonophorans (RAFF 1996, p. 138). This is especially true after molecular studies of 18S rRNA (TELFORD and HOLLAND 1993) and microstructure demonstrating the absence of a distinct peritoneum (SHINN and ROBERTS 1994). Arguments in favor of their deuterostome character can be found in BRLJScA and BRUSCA 1990. Regarding this group of organisms, the debate no longer centers on considering the Chaetognatha as Protostomes or Deuterostomes, but rather focuses on clarifying their affinities with coelomates (GEE 1996). Therefore, more information will still be needed before clarifying the phylogenetic relationships of the Chaetognatha, which cannot yet be properly established.

The phylogenetic position of the lophophorate phyla (Brachiopoda, Ectoprocta, and Phoronidea) has been and continues to be a subject of debate (WILLMER 1990, BRUScA and BRUScA 1990, GEE 1996), although there seems to be consensus in considering them as a monophyletic group integrated into the protostome radiation (HALANYcH et al. 1995 and 1996, CONWAY-MORRIS et al. 1996), although the internal relationships of the phyla within this monophyletic group remain unresolved.

As we anticipated at the beginning of this chapter, there is currently a general consensus in considering the Deuterostomes as a monophyletic group consisting of only three phyla (Echinodermata, Chordata and Hemichordata). However, their internal phylogenetic ordering is disputed and, as in the case of the lophophorates, it deals with the classic "three-tree problem": where there are arguments that justify the three possible topologies. The resolution of this problem is not simple.

P. 14 / P. 15

The interest in clarifying the origin of vertebrates and related organisms underlies our particular anthropocentric viewpoint, seeking to resolve the question of our own origins. It is precisely in this area of ​​knowledge that the most conflicting opinions arise.

The approach we have found most satisfactory to solving the problem of the origin of chordates—the large group that includes humans—and echinoderms—one of the groups most closely related to chordates—is the one developed and matured over the past thirty years by Richard Jefferies and his collaborators, who have taken up the previous work of Gislén (1930) and Matsumoto (1929). These ideas, which we will call the Calcichordate Theory, are based on the detailed anatomical study of oblong, asymmetrical, appendage-equipped organisms known as carpoids. These animals inhabited the seas during the Paleozoic, with a peak period between the Middle Cambrian and the Late Ordovician. The arguments behind the ideas related to the Calcichordate theory are not easy to understand, and this requires studying a large number of Carpoid specimens and subsequently integrating these observations into a coherent evolutionary model in light of comparative anatomy. Thus, we must consider not only the preserved elements (skeleton), but also the structures that did not fossilize but left evidence of their existence through impressions, marks, or textural changes on the internal surfaces of the skeleton. Fortunately, carpoid fossils tend to be particularly rich in these types of details. The reconstruction of the soft tissues that did not fossilize must necessarily be carried out under the criteria of comparative anatomy. Only in this way will we come to understand the anatomical significance of our observations.

P. 15 /

The fossils of these organisms began to be known in the middle of the last century and have been interpreted in such disparate ways that they even affect the interpretation of the anterior and posterior ends of the animal and what the dorsal-ventral aspect represents. Therefore, we could speak of schools of thought or schools of thought. One of the oldest interpretations of these fossils is due to Jaekel (1900 and 1918), and it was the one that was broadly maintained in paleontology textbooks until the publication of the chapters corresponding to Carpoids in the Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology, the paleontological encyclopedia par excellence (UBAGHS and CASTER 1967). George Ubaghs was one of those responsible for developing these chapters and captured in this work a series of innovative ideas about the interpretation of these organisms (UBAGHS 1961, 1967). This is the Stylophore Theory, which, due to the encyclopedic nature of the Treatise, has enjoyed widespread popularity among paleontologists beginning to study carpoids. Ubaghs's ideas are based primarily on the similarity found between the appendix of these organisms and the arm of Pelmatozoans, but they suffer from serious interpretation flaws, which are resolved with successive proposals that sometimes seem forced. These ideas are widely accepted by authors such as R. Parsley, K. Caster, J. Sprinkle, and B. Lefebvre (PARSLEY 1980, 1982, 1988, 1991; PARSLEY and CASTER 1975, 1982; SPRINKLE 1992; LEFE'JBRE 1998). Another historically interesting proposal is made by Phylip (1979,1981) who considered the appendix of these carpoids to be equivalent to the peduncle of crinoids. Kolata et al. (KoLxrA and JOLLIE 1982 and KOLATA et al. 1991), who initially followed the Stylophore Theory (Kolata and Guensburg 1979), while adopting Phylip's ideas, also took up the previous ideas of JAEKEL (1900,1918) and BATHER (1913,1926). The interpretation of Kolata et al. provides carpoids with a propulsive tail and substantially disagrees with the body homology hypotheses of Cornuta and Mitrata. Generally, all these schools consider the group of carpoids as polyphyletic, derived from typical pentaradiate forms or with an uncertain origin, explaining the similarities between the different groups of carpoids from the point of view of adaptive convergences.

/ P. 16 /

The originality of the Calcichordate Theory lies in its integrative and predictive nature. Consideration of the deuterostome population has allowed for macroevolutionary proposals affecting high-ranking taxa in three phyla: Hemichordata, Echinodermata, and Chordata. Jefferies' key contribution is the concept of dexiotetism, which explains the asymmetries (both anatomical and physiological) observed in echinoderms, chordates, and carpoids, especially those occurring during development.

P. 17 image breaks up the previous paragraph:

- Pterobranchia
  - G Soluta
    - a Solute
    - G
      - Cincta
      - Ctenocystoidea
      - Helicoplacoidea
      - Echinodermata (grouped)
        - Edrioasteroidea
    - a Solute
    - a Sollute
  - Z Soluta / G Cornuta
    - a Cornute
    - a Cornute
    - a Cornute
    - Z Cornuta
    - Chordata (grouped)
      - G Mitrata
      - a Mitrate
      - a Mitrate
      - a Mitrate

or maybe

- - Pterbroanchia (Cephalodiscus)
  - Soluta (GRADE)
    - Coleicarpus sprinklei (stalked Solute)
    - - - Cincta (Trochocystites bohemicus)
        - - Ctenocystoidea (Courtessolea)
          - - Helicoplacoidea (Westgardella)
            - Echinodermata (CLADE)
              - Edrioasteroidea (Stromatocystites)
      - - Castericystis vali (benthic Solute)
        - - Dendrocystoides scoticus (asymmetric Solute)
          - Cornuta (GRADE)
            - Ceratocystis perrieri (basal Cornute)
            - - Cothurnocystis elizae (boot-shaped Cornute)
              - - Prokopicystis (nearly-symmetrical Cornute)
                - Chordata (CLADE)
                  - Mitrata (CLADE)
                    - a very thin Mitrate
                    - - a somewhat asymmetrical Mitrate
                       - Placocystites forbesianus (a wide Mitrate)

Phylogeny of the Deuterostomes according to the evolutionary hypothesis of Dexiotetism and the Calcichordate. The phylogenetic position of the Ctenocystoids is highlighted.

/ P. 18

The left-right asymmetry found in Dexiothetica (= Echinoderms + Chordates) is the result of dexiothetism, an episode that occurred in one of their ancestors when a clearly bilateral animal (the pre-dexiothetic animal), similar to the modern Cephalodiscus (a Pterobranch Hemichordate), would rest on its right side on the seafloor; this adopted lifestyle would influence its development, thus altering its symmetry. An analogy that allows for a better understanding of this hypothesis can be found in soles (Soleiformes). The dexiothetic animal exhibits a very marked asymmetry, with a right flank equivalent to the dorsal side of Cephalodiscus and a left flank homologous to the ventral side of this Pterobranch, although it obviously remains polarized with an anterior and a posterior end.

Among the known fossils is an animal similar to the dexiothetic animal but with a calcitic dermal skeleton similar to that found in modern-day echinoderms: Coleicarpus sprinkle (Solute Carpoid, Middle Cambrian of Utah). Coleicarpus has a peduncle by which it attached itself to the substrate, and presumably a notochord was found inside. Since it presents the synapomorphies of the dexiothetic animal and the symplesiomorphies of echinoderms and chordates, Coleicarpus must be placed in the basal group of the dexiothetics, immediately prior to the divergence between the lineages that would give rise to echinoderms and chordates.

P. 18 / P. 19

Of these two lineages, the one that gave rise to the present-day Chordates would achieve conspicuous bilateral symmetry in six successive steps (Ijefferies, Brown, and Dales 1996). The most primitive representative of this lineage is Castericystis vali (Soluta), which is broadly similar to Coleicarpus but has a free falcate tail with three distinct regions. The plane of symmetry in the distal region of this tail would undergo a countertorsion, recovering predexiothetic symmetry; this is the condition observed in Dendrocystites (Soluta). In the second phase, the countertorsion continues, reaching the middle region of the tail, as observed in Ceratocystis (Cornuta).  The third phase involves a refinement of bilateral symmetry throughout the tail; however, the animal's head remains highly asymmetrical (a dexiotetic condition), as observed in Cothurnocystis (Cornuta). Bilateralization continues anteriorly, and in Prokopicystis (Cornuta), bilateral symmetry is achieved in the head contour, although it continues to exhibit significant internal asymmetries. Bilateralization of internal organs occurs in Mitrata, first as the appearance of organs on the left of the antimeres that already existed on the right, which represents the origin of paired organs, followed later by the generalized bilateralization of the oral area.

P. 19 /

Once secondary bilateral symmetry was achieved in chordates, the calcitic skeleton would be lost independently in the three known strains of extant chordates. Craniates would develop a cartilaginous skeleton, first in the head and later in other parts of the body; finally, vertebrates would develop a phosphate skeleton. Acraniates would retain only the notochord as a skeleton, and most tunicates would even lose it, especially in the adult stages. The transformation of a mitred to a craniate is explained by the overgrowth of the tail over the head in mitreds, such that the anterior portions of the tail move forward above the viscera, giving rise to the trunk and the notochordal part of the head. Furthermore, there is evidence that the neural crest and placodes of chordates existed in the common ancestors of extant chordates (JEFFERIES et al. 1996).

/ P. 20

The Calcichordate Theory has recently received support from developmental biology, as there are gene expression mechanisms that explain the asymmetries found in chordates. In those organs of extant chordates derived from the head of the Calcichordate (including the mandibular somites, digestive system, circulatory system of the branchial system, and brain), large asymmetries are observed that do not appear in those organs derived from the tail of the Calcichordate (such as the notochord, kidneys, posthyoid muscular somites, and associated vascular and nervous systems). Thus, the anterior limit of Hox gene expression can be located at the anterior end of the Calcichordate tail. Finally, a simple model of ontogenetic development in which a symmetrizing morphogen produced at the anterior end of the tail (s) interacts with another lateralizing morphogen produced first from the left (WI) and subsequently from the right (WD) may have influenced the emergence and development of paired organs (JEFFERIES et al. 1996).

P. 20 / P. 21

The evolutionary history of the lineage that gave rise to modern-day echinoderms comprises several successive steps observable in the Cincta carpoids (e.g., Trochocystites), the Ctenocystoids (e.g., Courtessolea), the Helicoplacoids (e.g., Westgardella), and finally the primitive Edrioasteroids (Stromatocystitids) and Eocrinoids. These steps would involve the acquisition of a new bilateral symmetry that masks the dexiotetic asymmetry. This fact is especially evident when observing the ambulacral system.

P. 21 /

Coleicarpus (Carpoid Soluta), considered the most primitive carpoid and the common ancestor of Chordates and Echinoderms, possessed an ambulacral system with a single branch located on the underside of the anterior arm. In Cincta, the ambulacral has split into two lateral branches of different sizes that rest on the body surface on either side of the mouth. In Ctenocystoids, both branches are similar in size, shape, and arrangement, reaching a marked bilaterality. In Helicoplacoids, a third anterior branch appears; however, in these organisms, the trimerous symmetry is masked by an autapomorphic helical body plan (DOMÍNGUEZ in press). Pentamerous symmetry subsequently appears in two successive phases: first, the lateral ambulacral branches split (the 2-1-2 pattern, typical of Cystoids and Edrioasteroids); Secondly, these forked branches separate, giving rise to a distinctly pentameric pattern. The acquisition of pentameric symmetry is concomitant with the acquisition of a discoidal body and a reorientation of the body orifices toward the upper face of the animal. The position of these structures clearly maintains the primitive bilateral pattern in the group. It should also be noted that the pentameric radial pattern has been modified on several occasions in favor of particular bilateral patterns. Examples include irregular sea urchins, various crinoid kin (such as Calceocrinids and Hybocrinids, among others), and holothurians. In the latter, bilaterality is related to lying on one of their flanks on the substrate, while in irregular echinoids it is related to motor polarization.

/ P. 22

In this context, the proposed phylogenetic position of Cincta and Ctenocystoidea stands out. These are the most primitive echinoderms, which we place at the base of the lineage that would give rise to all echinoderms with pentamerous radial symmetry, one of the characteristics that most accurately defines the extant representatives of the phylum Echinodermata. The study of these organisms that populated the Cambrian seas, and especially that of the Ctenocystoidea, is, as previously stated, the subject of this work.

P. 22 / P. 23

CHAPTER 3: Background
====================

P. 23 / P. 24

[blank]

P. 25 / P. 26

History of the discovery of the Ctenocystoids

The Ctenocystoids were introduced to the scientific community in the Science journal forum in 1969, where Robison and Sprinkle reported
the discovery of the oldest carpoids known to that point. This is a new species with structural characteristics sufficiently different from those found in other carpoids to warrant the creation of a new class with a single species ("...is sufficiently different to warrant the erection of a new class..." Robison and Sprinkle, 1969). The description is based on the study of several hundred specimens, all corresponding to the same species (Ctenocystis utahensis Robison and Sprinkle, 1969), from three different localities in the Spence Shale (lower Middle Cambrian) in Utah,
(USA). The most significant features of this new Carpoid are: absence of a "peduncle" ("peduncular organ"), almost bilateral symmetry, flattened horizontal skeleton and a specialized oral apparatus; all indicative of a mobile benthic animal; proposing for these carpoids an original jet-propulsion locomotion system. The oral apparatus of these organisms is very peculiar and according to these authors it must have been adapted for excavation, filtration or separation of nutrients. Finally, they propose the search for the ancestors of the Homalozoans in rocks of Early Cambrian age. This information will be collected in the Treatise of Paleontology in an appendix to the corresponding volume on acrinoids (Volume T, "Addendum to Subphylum HomaloZoa, Ctenocystoids" p. T998) since the corresponding volume on Carpoids (Volume S) was edited in 1967 (UBAGHS 1967; CASTER 1967); the family Ctenocystidae is proposed in this work (SPRINKLE and RORISON 1978) and a latex replica of a small slate slab containing about 36 specimens is included. This species will later be included and discussed in various general and text-based works. New specimens will be included in a general article by GUNTHER and GUNTHER 1981, as well as in the Atlas of Invertebrate Macrofossils by A. B. Smith (SMITH 1985, pl. 7.1.7 A, B and C).

P. 25 / P. 26

In 1975, Ubaghs published an analysis of the current state of knowledge on Paleozoic echinoderms ("Early Paleozoic Echinoderms", UBAGHS 1975); he based his work on the data of RoBISON and SPRINKLE 1969 when describing the Ctenocystoids, highlighting the strong tendency towards bilaterality in these animals, which continue to be asymmetrical, as shown by certain structures: differences in the shape and size of certain marginal plates, differential development of the spines on the posterior margin, and the presence of an opening behind and to the right of the mouth. He also highlighted the absence of a peduncle and brachial appendages (ulacophore?), found similarities with the Stylophorans (Cornuta + Mitrata), and considered it prudent not to include them in the same class given the marked differences between the two groups.

P. 26 /.

The Class Ctenocystoidea remained monospecific until 1985, when two independent research teams separately reported the discovery of new specimens corresponding to two new species: Etoctenocystis bohemica Fatka & Kordule, 1985 from Bohemia and Ctenocystis jago¡Jell, Burret & Banks 1985 from Tasmania; both teams compared their specimens with Ctenocystis utahensis Robison & Sprinkle, 1969, the only Ctenocystoid known until then. FATKA & KORDULE 1985 studied more than 300 specimens from the Paradoxides gracilis Zone of the Jince Formation (middle part of the Middle Cambrian); It is worth highlighting the presence of ossicles intercalated between the two marginal plate frames and they interpret these animals as suspension-feeding microphages of the lowest traffic level (in the sense of height and not energy ("Lower-Level microtrophic suspension feeder") and confirm the propulsion method postulated by Robison and Sprinkle (R. and R. 1969 and R. 1978). On the other hand, they identify in a figure of Barrande some isolated ossicles of Etoctenocyst¡s bohemica attributed to Acanthocyst¡tes briareus, an eocrine of eocrinid (BARRANDE 1887, pl. 2, fig. 31 and 32, the dotted mass surrounding the trilobite are isolated ossicles of these carpoids).

For their part, JELL, BURRET, and BANKS (1985) described Ctenocystis ja gol in an article aimed at reporting new discoveries of echinoderms from the Early Paleozoic of Australia. Until that time, only one Cambrian species (Cyclocystodes primotica, Henderson and Shergood (1971)) and two Ordovician species (Cheirocrinus merrilles, Brown (1964)) and Astrocystodes distans, Webby (1968)) had been described from this continent. They doubled the number of described Australian species and described new material in open nomenclature. These authors describe Ctenocystis jagol as a rare member of the Cateena Group (middle Cambrian) in northern Tasmania, from which only five partially disarticulated specimens were found. They describe the material only in those ways where it differs from Ctenocystis utahensis and conclude by commenting that very little can be added to the description of the genus provided by Robinson and Sprinkle (1969).

/ P.  27

In 1967, G. Ubaghs described a new species (Ctenocystis smithi) from the Montagne Noire (Southern France) and discovered by A. B. Smith of the Natural History Museum in London, to whom Ubaghs named the species (UBAGHS 1987). Eight specimens are known (two in the Vizcaino area and five in the Natural History Museum). In Ubaghs' description of C. smithi, he emphasizes the rarity of ctenocystids, the small size of the new species, and its poor preservation (the specimens are partially disarticulated), which makes detailed study difficult. He highlights the differences between some ossicles on the underside, as well as details not described in C. utahensis, and concludes with a comparison of this species with those already described.

/ P. 28

Also in 1987, Jefferies, Lewis and Donovan, in a work describing and reconstructing Protocystites menevensis H¡cKs, 1872 (Chordata Cornuta), mentioned the presence of Ctenocystis, highlighting the interest of these fossils as they are the only record of this group from Great Britain (“The record of Ctenocystis sp. is of interest as being the only known occurrence of the genus in Br¡tain” JEFFER ¡Es etas1? 1987, p. 438). This material was collected at different times by Jefferies, Lewis, Paul and others in 1983 and 1964, and its study and reconstruction are carried out in the present Doctoral Thesis (Pembrocystis gallica nov. gen. nov. sp.).

In 1988, Ubaghs and Robison described Ctenocystis colodon from the Wheeler Formation; it is a species very similar to C. utahensis, from which it differs in several anatomical details (UBAGHS and Robison 1988). In the same work, they described Soluta Castericystis sprinklei from the same levels; they created the Order Ctenocystida to "complete the taxonomic hierarchy to which the different ctenocystoid species are assigned." UBAGI-iS and Robison 1988, p. 4; they also commented on the "modest stratigraphic range" of ctenocystids and that the discovery of new representatives is expected.

P. 28 / P. 29

PARSLEY 1991 cites Ctenocystoideans from North Africa (oral corn. of Sprinkle 1985 in Parsley 1991) in a list of geographical areas where Ctenocystoidean fossils have been found; however, James Sprinkle (personal communication, 24 January 1997) is unaware of the existence of Ctenocystoideans, “perhaps this was a mistake and he was referring to one of the occurrences of Ctenocystoideans in northern Gondwana (Czech Republic?, France?)”. Consulted R. Parsley (personal communication, 9 September 1998) recognizes this as an error.

P. 29 /

A new ctenocystoid from the Middle Cambrian of Poland is described by Dz¡KYORLOWsKI 1995. It is Jugoszovia archaeocyathoides, a ctenocystoid very different from the other previously described ctenocystoids that, since the discovery of its first fossils, has been successively misinterpreted. Jugoszovia fossils were previously interpreted by ORŁOWSKI 1959 and 1964 as different species of Archaeocyathans, who mistook the ctenidial apparatus typical of Ctenocystoids for the wall of Archaeocyathans. In 1969, A.
R. Palmer, in a personal communication to James Sprinkle (SPRINKLE 1973, p. 111), drew attention to the suspicion that some of the Archaeocyathan fragments described by Ortowski were echinoderm calyces. U. Sprinkle studies some of the replicas in the Palmer collection and finds in some specimens certain similarities with the theca of K¡nzericystis, although other specimens have a certain resemblance to the recently described Ctenocystoideans (ROBISON and SPRINKLE, 1969). Different authors who knew preliminary versions (manuscripts) of DzIK ORLOwSKI 1995 article or fossil material of Jugoszovia archaeocyathoides DzIK and ORLOwSKI, 1995 agree in pointing out the erroneous interpretation of this animal (U. Sprinkle, personal communication, January 24, 1997; A. B. Smith, personal communication April 1995 and R. P. S. Jefferies personal communication April 1995 and later; DOMÍNGUEZ in press) since they describe a chimeric animal similar to an Edrioasteroid with a proboscis with a distal ctenoidal organ. These are simply fossils of JugosZovia superimposed on a Stromatocystitid that needs a description.

/ P. 30

En el presente trabajo de Tesis Doctoral se revisa el conjunto de todas las especies descritas con anterioridad así como cuatro nuevas especies, para lo cual se ha estudiado: el material tipo y abundante material no tipo de CL utahensis; todos los ejemplares conocidos de CL colodon y CL smithi (las series tipo de ambas especies); ejemplares fósiles de E? bohemica y J archaeacyathoides, así como todos los ejemplares conocidos de Pembrocystis gallica nov. gen. nov. sp., Conollia staffordinov. gen. nov. sp. , Gilcidia viviannae nov. gen. nov. sp. y Courtessolea moncereti nov. gen. nov. sp. Lamentablemente, no se ha tenido acceso al material fósil de CL jagoi (los cinco únicos ejemplares conocidos que integran la serie tipo se encuentran depositados en instituciones australianas). Por fortuna para el presente estudio monográfico, JELL, BURRET y BANKS 1985 figuraron replicas del holotipo en dos fases sucesivas de preparación; con estas figuras y modificando su escala y orientación hemos podido preparar un par estereoscópico con el que se ha podido reconstruir esta especie.

P. 30 / P. 31

CHAPTER 4: Material studied
=======================

P. 31 / P. 32

[blank]

P. 32 / P. 33

Chapter 4 Index


Centers, Institutions and collections that have deposited or referenced specimens of Ctenocystoidea

1.- Natural History Museum, London
2.- Muséum d’Histoire Naturelle, Paris (Daniel Vizcaïno Collection, Carcassonne).
3.- Geological Survey, Prague.
4.- Narodni Muzeum V Praze, Prague.
5.- Museum of the Department of Geology, University of Tasmania. Australia.
6.- Museum of Victoria, Palaeontological Collection. Australia.
7.- U.S. National Museum of Natural History (Smithsonian Institution), Washington D.C.
8.- Department of Geological and Geophysical Sciences, University of Utah.
9.- Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard University, Cambridge.

Studied Material of Ctenocystoidea

* Courtessolea moncereti nov. gen. nov. sp.
* Jugoszovía archaeocyathoides Dzik and Ortowski, 1995
* Conollia staffordi nov. gen. nov. sp.
* Pembrocystis gallica gen. nov. sp. nov.
* Etoctenocystis bohemica Fatka and Kordule, 1985
* Etoctenocystis bohemíca Fatka and Kordule, 1985 [sic, duplication]
* Gilcidia smithi (Ubaghs, 1987) com. nov.
* Ctenocystis utahensis Robison and Sprinkle, 1969
* Ctenocystis colodon Ubaghs and Robison, 1988

P. 33 / P. 34
Known Ctenocystoid material

* Jugoszovia archaeocyathoides Dzik and Orlowski, 1995
* Etoctenocystis bohemica Fatka and Kordule, 1985
* Gilcidia jagoi (Jell, Burret, and Banks, 1985) Nov. com.
* Ctenocystis utahensis Robison and Sprinkle, 1969

P. 34 / ...
... / P. 44

P. 44 / P. 45

CHAPTER 5: Anatomy
=================

P. 45 / P. 46

[blank]

P. 46 / P. 47

[index]

P. 47 / P. 48

[more index]

P. 48 / P. 49

SKELETAL RECONSTRUCTION PROCESS

The study of Ctenocystoid species begins with the process of reconstructing the different species. This will yield a three-dimensional model that will be the basis or starting point for other studies such as hydrodynamic behavior, taxonomy, and phylogeny.

1. Ossicle Identification

In the first phase, we will proceed with an initial taphonomic study with special emphasis on the deformation of the preserved elements of each specimen, as well as the relative trajectories followed by the different body portions during the postmortem processes of skeletal disarticulation. The ultimate goal of this phase is the identification (positive or by exclusion) of the different skeletal elements as well as their actual shape. This process will be carried out for each of the specimens studied.

With this information, we will compile a basic catalog of the positively identified ossicles. These ossicles are drawn in six patterns (dorsal, ventral, right, left, anterior, and posterior), taking into account, as far as possible, the presumed original position of the ossicle in the animal. Most often, only some of these patterns are available or observable in a specific specimen.

P. 49 /

Some ossicles have a characteristic structure and are easy to recognize. Once these have been identified, we will proceed to identify the other ossicles according to their position relative to those already identified. At this point, we must reconstruct the relative displacements that the ossicles underwent during the skeletal disarticulation processes following the animal's death. Sometimes the displacements are short and correspond more to partial rotations than relative displacements. In this case, identifying the ossicles is trivial, but the problem arises in cases where juxtaposed displacements in different directions have occurred, accompanied by rotation and even the loss of part of the skeleton.

/ P. 50

In more complex cases, we will sketch the final position of the observable ossicles. If a part and a counterpart are available, both sketches will be superimposed to provide three-dimensional information regarding the fracture plane of the sample, differentiating both parts by using different lines (for example, a thick line for the part and a thin line for the counterpart, thus obtaining a three-dimensional appearance by optically zooming out the counterpart). Dashed lines will be reserved to complete missing or non-directly observable parts. Using this general sketch of the sample, we will outline the relative trajectories of the identified ossicles using curved arrows. Ribbon-shaped arrows will be used to give a three-dimensional appearance, so that the displacements and rotations identified for each ossicle are easily visible. This entire process will be carried out with respect to fixed reference points, either arbitrary or with respect to more conservative parts.

P. 50 /

Considering this two-dimensional diagram as a starting point, a basic three-dimensional reconstruction will be prepared using models of the skeletal elements in their original position. To do this, the structure studied will be represented in block diagrams. In cases that are difficult to understand, we will use plastic putty to create three-dimensional models that facilitate the interpretation of the structure studied. For this basic block diagram, we will initially use a standard model of some species that are already well known. In our case, since there are specimens of Ctenocystis utahensis with practically zero deformation and displacement of the ossicles and whose reconstruction proved to be easy, we will use this species as a base model from which we will, in a first approximation, develop the reconstructions of the other species. On this base model of Ctenocystis utahensis, we will place the arrows previously drawn on the two-dimensional model, but in reverse, so we can predict the initial position of all the ossicles. This process will be repeated for each specimen studied, gradually replacing the base model with the representation of the species studied.

/ P. 51

Once the displacements of a specimen's body parts are known, we can determine the predicted position of those ossicles not yet identified. We will search among the predicted areas for those ossicles not positively identified and thus carry out an identification by successive exclusions. Each time we identify an ossicle by exclusion, we will add information about its displacement and rotation to the block diagram. We readjust the general model of body part displacements in an iterative process of trial and error. Occasionally, inconsistencies will arise that will lead to reconsideration of the identifications. The ultimate goal of this first phase is to obtain a graphic database of the ossicles identified for each specimen.

2. Comparison between specimens

The next phase of this study is the comparison between the different specimens studied, searching for those that present the most complete information about the three-dimensional structure of the skeleton. The objective of this phase is to complete a three-dimensional model of all the ossicles present in the living organism and integrate them into the three-dimensional model of the skeleton. To complete the objectives of this phase, we will cross-reference the data obtained in the previous phase.

In Ctenocystoids (Dizonida), we have verified that there is an order of priority in the identification of ossicles, as some ossicles are more characteristic than others that present fewer diagnostic elements. We have verified that this order is as follows (the description of these elements is provided later in this chapter):

P. 51 / P. 52

1.- Lower frame: IEI, IFD, IPI, PO, CI, ICD (the latter unspecified. Upper frame: SF1, SF0. ​​Oral system: SOC.
2.- Lower frame: ILI. Top frame: SLI, SLD
3.- Upper frame: SPD, SPI (and/or the subplates into which it is subdivided)
4.- Oral system: SOD, SOI, external ctenidial plate.
5.- Ctenidial plates.
6.- Ossicles of the infracentral and supracentral integuments.

The most characteristic ossicles are those that make up the marginal system, but these vary in degree of identifiability. The ILI plate, in particular, can be confused with the inverted SLI and SLD plates, since all of them, normally dorsal or ventral, have a rectangular outline and a "T" section. Another problem is the positive identification of the ICI and ICD plates, since both plates are very similar. This apparent difficulty is not as significant for the process of reconstructing the organism, since they are very similar plates, with almost bilateral symmetry, and are practically interchangeable.

The identification of the ossicles in each specimen allowed us to compile the base catalog of identified ossicles. Their subsequent comparison allowed us to obtain the catalog of available skeletal elements, through which we verified the completeness of the collection of ossicles present in the sample as a whole. With this final catalog, we completed this phase.

3.- Rescaling the specimens (normalization)

P. 52 / 

The main function of the catalog of available ossicles is to unify them into a model that synthesizes the skeleton of the species studied in the theoretical model, which is the reconstruction of the species. A second use is to evaluate the existing interindividual variation, either with respect to the structure, shape, and histology of the ossicle or with respect to the relative proportions between them. The existing interindividual variations for a specific ossicle are directly observable by looking at the aforementioned catalog of ossicles. Once the size differences have been identified, we must adjust the scales in a process we will call rescaling or normalization.

/ P. 53

Rescaling is also an iterative trial-and-error process, as it is based on establishing comparison parameters from which a scale change is made. Incorrect selection of these parameters leads to the need to repeat the scale change using another parameter as a base, so the process is carried out through successive approximations. There are software applications for performing this process semi-automatically, which are especially useful when the amount of information is large and when morphometric points (landmarks) can be established that can be correlated between the different elements studied. Notable among these applications is GRF-ND (Generalized Ratio Fitting of n-dimensional Landmark Data, SLícE 1994), which generates superposition according to different algorithms. The main problem we have encountered when using these tools is the difficulty of uniquely designating morphometric points in curved structures. BOOKSTEIN 1991 (known as the "Orange Book") developed different procedures for selecting morphometric points. In some of the ossicles, the application of these techniques would have been of great help by saving calculation time, but in most cases it would have been more of a hindrance than a help, as digitizing the plates would have required much more work than other more traditional techniques. For this reason, we preferred to perform the calculations using classic technical drawing techniques. Among these techniques, the construction of homothetic triangles and homologous lattices stand out for their ease of application (COINEAu 1987).

P. 53 / P. 54

As a basis for rescaling, we typically use an easily identifiable skeletal element that is present in a large number of specimens. Once we know the proportional differences between two specimens for that base ossicle, we rescale the remaining ossicles. In cases where the base ossicle is unavailable, we use another of the already rescaled ossicles. As a result of this process, we obtain a collection of standardized scale drawings with which we begin the next phase of the skeletal reconstruction process.

4. Pre-assembly

In the case of Ctenocystoids, the easiest portion of the skeleton to restore has been the lower frame of marginal plates (including the rastrellum). This is due to the presence of wide or well-defined articular facets that prevent relative rotation between the different ossicles thanks to a good "assembly." In the case of the upper frame, we find more "flexible" joints that allow for a looser assembly. Additionally, positive identification of the ossicles in the lower frame is achieved to a greater extent than in the upper frame (see point 3). For all these reasons, the reconstruction will begin on the ventral side of the lower frame. The method that has proven to be the most versatile is tracing a complete series of rescaled ossicles onto tracing paper. By moving them onto a sheet of white paper and securing them with adhesive tape, we will complete the lower frame. In doing so, we will see that some ossicles fit well, but others need to be reconsidered because they do not allow a good fit between the pieces. These ossicles are reconsidered in several aspects, the most immediate being the reconsideration of the scale change used. In other cases, the orthogonal rules themselves must be reconsidered, so the ossicle must be redrawn and subsequently rescaled. The process is again iterative and concludes when the fit between the skeletal pieces considered is considered optimal. At this point, a tracing of the positions of each ossicle is made, which will constitute the base ventral rule of the species model. We should note that at this time we only have a sketch of the lower marginal frame.

P. 54 / P. 55

Next, we will proceed with the reconstruction of the upper marginal framework. This time, we will use the reconstruction of the lower framework we just prepared as a basis, but with a small modification: we will make an inverted tracing. To do this, we will turn the tracing paper of the lower framework reconstruction face down in its ventral view and trace the drawing. The result is equivalent to a dorsal standard of the lower framework. This latter will have a dual purpose: it will serve as a guide for the reconstruction of the upper framework and will serve as the basis for the reconstruction of the inner aspect of the ventral half of the animal.

In the dorsal standard of the ventral framework, we find a series of areas or points that are especially useful for the reconstruction of the upper framework. These are: the dorsal processes of the IFI and FO ossicles; the articular crest of the FI, LI, FO, and PO plates; the posterior curvature of the IPI and PO plates; and finally, the anterior teeth of the ICI and CD plates.

P. 55 /

The dorsal processes of the IFI and IFO ossicles coincide with a notch on the ventral surface of plates SF1 and SF0. ​​This is the first connection point between the ossicles of the lower and upper frames. The drawings of plates SF1 and SF0 will be rotated until the longitudinal joint lines coincide. If their position is unknown, a first approximation may be the coincidence of the external edges of these plates with the equivalent of the lower frame. We will provisionally fix these tracings. We will continue with plate SOC. Since it is a bilateral ossicle located on the midline of the body, we will align the bilateral line of symmetry with the midline between the teeth of plates ICI and ICD, sliding it back and forth until it is in an appropriate position. We will then make the necessary corrections to the position of plates IFI and IFD (rotation). From this point on, we will complete the upper frame from front to back, paying special attention to the arrangement of the ossicles that close the upper frame at its posterior edge. We will then check the position of the joints between the upper and lower frames, readjusting them where necessary.

/ P. 56

The frontal area presents adjustment problems because the faces of the ossicles are not oriented parallel to the considered standards. Thus, for example, the SOD and SOI ossicles usually have an oblique orientation. In this case, we must present the ossicles in one of the standards (frontal and dorsal standards) and make successive projections on the other two considered (lateral and dorsal standards), readjusting if necessary.

Finally, we will locate the ctenidium ossicles. These ossicles vary in size according to a regular series. The first two (those closest to the SOC plate) are usually small, almost residual. Ctenidial plates 3rd to 5th are usually medium-sized and are usually oriented parallel to the animal's bilateral plane. We will select one of these for a first approximation and place it in one of the lateral standards (the right one, for example), adjusting the degree of elevation. From here, we will make projections onto the other standards to locate this ossicle, and once correctly positioned, we will focus on the frontal standard. In this standard, we will place the external ossicles in their approximate position and then average the position of the other ossicles. Once all the ctenidium plates are presented, we will check their positions and the degree of warping they have, avoiding overlapping. We must keep in mind at all times that the standards are two-dimensional representations of a three-dimensional object that we are gradually completing through an iterative process of trial and error, successively approximating an optimal model.

5. Final Assembly

P. 56 /

Once the final positions of each ossicle are known according to the ventral and dorsal standards, we will proceed to redraw the frontal, posterior, and lateral standards of each ossicle directly from the original material using a camera lucida. We will reorient the specimen (in our specific case, the latex replicas), ensuring that it fits into one of the standards already drawn in previous stages and redrawing the new standards according to this new reference system.

/ P. 57

Finally, we will draw the ventral, dorsal, left, right, anterior, and posterior standards of the reconstruction we have completed. These standards will also be used to complete aspects of the body cavity or even body sections of specific interest.

P. 57 / P. 58

TOPOGRAPHIC NOMENCLATOR USED IN CTENOCYSTOIDS

1. Background

When Robison and Sprinkle presented the first representative of the Ctenocystoids in 1969 (and later by V. and R. in 1978),
they offered an extremely concise terminology to designate the parts of these organisms, emphasizing a description of distinguishable structures rather than designating them properly. They distinguished an upper and lower framework of large marginal plates (supermarginals and infermarginals), although they distinguished a suroral (=SOC), suboral (=ICI and ICD), lateral (=SOD and Sol), ctenoids (=Ct), and central dorsal and ventral (=SCT and ICT, respectively).

Later, dELL, BURRET, and BANKS (1985) used essentially the same terms (ctenoid plates, dorsal centra, laterals, suboral plates, inferior central plates, ventral central plates). In the same year, FATKA and KORDULE (1985) slightly modified this notation, using terms such as the most posterior paired or unpaired inframarginal plates ("suboral = no-paired anterocentral supermarginal" [sic], "radials = anterocentral supermarginal plates" [sic], and "suborals = pair of anterocentral infermarginals" [sic]). In general terms, this pattern of relative designations with long, multi-word names has been maintained until now by different researchers.

2. Proposed Nomenclature for Skeletal Elements

P. 58 /

Completing this doctoral thesis has required the use of a precise, mnemonic, and sufficiently flexible nomenclature to facilitate the detailed study of the skeletal elements preserved in fossils and thus establish a comparative framework between the different taxa considered. These objectives have been satisfactorily met in both articulated and disarticulated specimens, proving especially effective in lists and catalogs of studied material when isolated skeletal elements have been used (see section on skeletal reconstruction).

/ P. 59

3. Explanation of the Proposed Nomenclature

This doctoral thesis proposes a new system to uniquely designate each ossicle or plate. It is based primarily on a set of three capital letters; each set of three letters is an acronym formed from the abbreviations indicating the position occupied by each ossicle in the animal's body.

P. 59 / P. 60

The proposed system is based on the best-known group of Ctenocystoids, both in terms of the number of taxa (see Taxonomy chapter), the number of known specimens (see Materials Studied), and the skeletal structure, which remains almost constant among all the taxa studied. These are the Ctenocystoids of the Dizonida morphological pattern; these organisms had a set of large plates that were almost invariable in terms of their overall proportions, distribution, and arrangement.

This nomenclature, while not entirely satisfactory for designating the parts of other morphological patterns (Monozonida, Pleurozida, and Azonida), is sufficient to describe the most characteristic element of the Class Ctenocystoidea: the Ctenidium and related structures. For this reason, the nomenclature proposed for the Dizonida morphological pattern should be extended to the other patterns, and we will propose appropriate terms for the unambiguous designation of those structures belonging to other morphological patterns that require it.

Dizonated Ctenocystoids have marginal plates distributed in two frames: one upper and one lower, and other ossicles are also arranged.

The first letter of each triad indicates whether a plate belongs to the upper (5) or lower (1) cycle, for example I•• or S••.

The second letter indicates the relative position of each ossicle along the axis of the animal, distinguishing four relative positions among the plates of the anterior area: an oral position (O), a frontal position (F), a lateral position (L), and a third posterior position (P), for example •F•, •L•, •P•, and •0•.

Completing the triad, the third letter indicates the position relative to the longitudinal axis of the animal. Thus, there will be ossicles located centrally (C), to the right of the midline (D) or to the left (1); thus, we will have ossicles ••I, ••C, or ••D. As an exception, we find the middle suboral ossicles of the rastrellum, which will be called ICI and ICD (inferior central left and right, respectively), since they are paired structures located in a median position.

P. 60 / P. 61

[diagram]

P. 61 / P. 62




... / P. 86

Topographic anatomy in other morphological planes

Monozonida

Monozonida possess a robust and rigid marginal framework. This marginal framework is unique and is considered homologous to the marginal framework of Cincta, although with significant modifications to the anterior edge. The ctenidium surrounds the mouth from the dorsal to ventral portions.

Ctenidial Apparatus

Ctenidium

Supporting Plates

The SOC plate is similar to those already described for Dizonida. The SOD and SOl plates are multiple, subpolygonal or rounded, thin, and small. These plates are arranged in two rows.

Ctenidial Plates

The ctenidial plates form two distinct groups. The dorsal group is made up of plates with a rounded contour, with a thick, convex outer edge. The four ventral plates of each series are relatively thin, with parallel lateral faces and a concave outer edge.

P. 86 / P. 87

Rastrellum

In Monozonates, it forms a continuation of the lower marginal frame, creating a frontal ring like a ring of ossicles. The triangular rastrellum forms the base of this triangle, with its front end forming the apices of the tongues, which are thin and rounded. The ICl and ICD plates are elongated and narrow, while the lateral plates (IFI and IFD) are very wide in their frontal portion. In these forms, the shoulder is located on the IFI and DIP plates and also on the anterior plates of the marginal framework, where several ctenidia plates articulate not dorsally as in the other morphological types but directly on the IFI and DIP plates or on the anterior plates of the marginal framework. The anterior teeth have a massive, rounded, and vertical appearance.

BODY

Marginal System

The marginal framework is made up of six large plates. Three of them form the left side of the body, and the other three the right. Each of these groups of three plates forms a rigid longitudinal bar. Between them, at the anterior end, is the rastrellum. At the posterior end, the right bar slightly overlaps the left.

Generally speaking, both bars are similar in size and shape, their cross-sections are roughly triangular and robust, with a slightly convex inner surface.

P. 87 / P. 88

Dorsal and Ventral Integuments

The dorsal integument must have been very flexible, joining the marginal system at its upper end. It is formed by very small, densely arranged spheroidal ossicles. The ventral integument is very small, almost residual.

Siphon

The siphon is similar to that described for dizoneates, although it is completely surrounded by integument, even on the ventral side.

PLEUROZONIDA

The body of Pleurozonida is flexible, formed by a complex marginal system of small ossicles; the ctenidial apparatus is prominent.

CTENIDIAL APPARATUS

Ctenidium

Supporting Plates

The SOC plate is similar to that found in Dizonida. The SOD and S1 plates are multiple, formed by subpolygonal or rounded ossicles, relatively thin and small. These ossicles form a beaded row on the anterior and upper margin of the body on both sides of the SOC plate, all of which serve to articulate the dorsal ctenidial plates.

P. 88 / P. 89

Ctenidial Plates

In Jugoszovia, the lamella has a subcircular outline, not a quadrangular one, as shown in DzíK and Orłowski 1995 (fig.). The variation in size and shape between the ossicles is minimal, and there is no appreciable torsion. The dorsal ctenidial plates articulate on the SO1 and SO2 plates already described. The articulation of the plates of the ventral series appears to occur on undifferentiated integumentary plates.

Rastrellum

In Pleurozonates, it forms a structure
independent of the marginal framework, separated by the integument and without coming into contact with it. The rastrellum is formed by
four ossicles; these are very similar and are arranged in a fan-like fashion. The differences between the lateral ossicles (L1 and L2) and the medial ones (L1 and L2) appear to be minimal. The body of these plates is a very tall and narrow parallelepiped; the posterior tongue is large, with its widest point located near the posterior apex. The anterior teeth have a massive, vertical appearance and are arranged along the longitudinal axis of the plate (ICI-ICD) or at an angle (IFI and DIF) since the teeth are parallel to each other.

BODY

Marginal System

P. 89 /

The marginal system of pleurozonids is complex, consisting of three series or bands of superimposed ossicles. The upper band is formed by a beaded series of small, oblong, and similar marginal ossicles. The lower series is composed of somewhat larger, oblong or kidney-shaped ossicles, with a notch at the articulation with other marginal ossicles. Between the two series is a band of acicular ossicles, arranged obliquely in a palisade, with the upper end pointing forward. This band is flexible.

/ P. 90

Dorsal and Ventral Integuments

The dorsal and ventral integuments are similar. Both are formed by flat, slightly convex plates with a polygonal outline and very thin. These integumentary plates leave little space between them. The dorsal integumentary plates are smaller than those of the ventral integument.

Siphon

Little known due to poor preservation, but similar to that described for Dizonida. The siphon is located between the upper and lower marginal frames, interrupting the median band.

AZONIDA
This morphological type is radically
different from the others previously described.

CTENIDIAL APPARATUS

P. 90 /

The ctenidial apparatus of Azonida is unique among known Ctenocystoids. It has a hemispherical cap shape and high bilateral symmetry. The plates of the rastrellum have been completely integrated into the ctenidium, making them indistinguishable from the ctenidial plates except for their size and position. The anterior teeth are indistinct from the lamellae of the ctenidial plates. The SOC plate protrudes along the dorsal midline.

/ P. 91

SOC Plate

Conollia has a highly modified SOC plate, with a residual body and a hypertrophied rostrum. The body of the SOC plate has been reduced to mere protuberances located at the base of a large rostrum; frontally, these protuberances appear triangular with a horizontal dorsum. The lamella has an elliptical outline and is very thin.

Ctenidial Plates

In Connolia, the bases of the ctenidial plates have been highly modified; they lack a condylar notch, and the dorsal process has disappeared.
An important modification in Connolia is the asymmetry that appears in the inferior process; this process is laminar, quadrangular in outline, slightly convex, and extends laterally only toward the medial portions of the ctenidium (marked by the position of the SOC plate). We call these expansions wings. The wings of any plate overlap the immediately dorsal one, also extending part of the next, such that the whole forms a semi-rigid ring that supports and keeps the lamellae in position. This ring forms a constricted area immediately behind the hemispherical cap formed by the lamellar portions of the ctenidium; we call this constriction the neck. The outer edge of each lamella has an abrupt basal (=posterior) end, semicircular in outline, and a Y-shaped section. Between two consecutive plates, just above the neck, there is a small space (=exhalant area).

P. 91 / P. 92

On the other hand, a significant reduction in size is observed toward the medial (=dorsal) portions. It is also worth noting that there is torsion in the ossicles, but in this case this torsion is located in the intermediate plates, not in the medial or outermost ones.

In the azonated forms, the SOD and SO1 plates are unrecognizable. The large spines on the neck are probably homologous to the SOD and SO1 plates. These spines are located just above the neck in its posterior portions. In Pleurozonida, the SOD-SO1 plates are multiple and beaded, so it is plausible to think that these large spines on the neck are multiple SOD-SO1 plates that modified its appearance and arrangement.

BODY

Integument

The body lacks a marginal system. The integument has large, very thin plates with a polygonal outline. The stereome of these plates is retiform, formed by a single layer. The plates present spine-like expansions. The basal portion of the spines is perpendicular to the plate surface but quickly bends backward, forming a path almost parallel to the body surface. Spines come in various sizes, from very thick to very thin, filiform. The latter usually have a cylindrical section; however, the largest have an oblong section. On the other hand, the external surface of the spines may be smooth (as in the case of filiform spines) or have rows of tubercles or spinels on their flanks. The lateral spinelets are usually oblique, diverging distally. The spines are stereomechanical growths in which the main growth axis predominates, aborting the trabecular portions. However, in some spines there is no main axis and they have a zigzag pattern.

P. 92 / P. 93

The spines are not distributed evenly across the entire body surface. On the ventral side, especially toward the anterior and middle portions, the spines are thick, with beaded expansions on the sides. Thinner spines are also arranged between the thick spines. Toward the back of the animal, and especially toward the posterior portions, the thick spines disappear.

Siphon

The posterior siphon is unknown, as this portion is not well preserved in any of the Conollia specimens studied. Certainly, and in comparison with other ctenocystoids, this structure must have been present; although, given the fragile build of the body skeleton, its size may have been reduced.

P. 93 / P. 94

SPLACENOLOGY

INTRODUCTION

The reconstruction of the anatomy of a fossil is usually based on the interpretation of indirect evidence and, in rare cases, on the presence of preserved viscera. Indirect evidence includes the identification of openings or external structures that correspond to specific organs and the impressions made by viscera on the skeletal elements of body cavities. It is very common, especially in slate materials, for fossils to be preserved as natural casts. In this case, the natural fillings of body cavities will faithfully reflect the position of the internal organs. This is a very common procedure, for example, in paleoneurology, where the nervous system is studied through the study of endocranial casts. Unfortunately, the internal cavity of ctenocystoids, unlike other carpoid classes, is very inconclusive as it presents very little evidence of the apposition and layout of the viscera.

INDICATIONS ABOUT INTERNAL ANATOMY

Externally visible clues (body orifices)

1. Mouth

P. 94 / 
The mouth is frontal, subhorizontal, and located in the median plane of the animal. It has an oblong or T-shaped outline. The roof of the mouth is formed by the body of the SOC plate, the lateral commissures by the superior processes of the IFI and DIP plates, and the base by different structures, usually the bodies of the ICI and ICD plates. The lateral processes of the IFI and IED plates project toward each other from the commissure above the bodies of the ICI-ICD plates; their length is a diagnostic characteristic of the genera. In Ctenocystis, they are very poorly insinuated, and therefore the mouth is wide and oblong. In Pembrocystis and Gicidia, the lateral processes are large, and the mouth has a T-shaped shape. Finally, in Etoctenocystis, the processes are confluent, and the mouth is oval and relatively small.

/ P. 95

Generally speaking, the mouth (or at least the space left by the skeleton) is very wide, almost as wide as the body cavity. The mouth was probably much smaller. It is worth noting its frontal position and the fact that it is bilaterally symmetrical.

2. Hydropore-gonopore?

In the anterior-right corner of the dorsal integument,
right where it joins the SFD plate, there is a small, elliptical pore. This pore appears as a small notch on the upper inner edge of the SFD plate and continues downward through a vertical pit along the entire SFD-dorsal integument articular facet. In Gilcidia smithiel, the groove also extends briefly along the lower surface of the plate, facing the body cavity.

The SPD plate canal is interpreted as the impression of a descending tubule and is interpreted as the petrous canal of the ambulacral system or as a combination of petrous canal and gonoduct. This tubule must have entered the body cavity directly from the lower edge of the SPD plate canal without passing through the lateral wall of the skeleton. For this reason, no further evidence of this structure is found.

P. 95 / P. 96

3.- Posterior cone (siphon) - siphonal opening

The posterior cone was initially interpreted as an anal pyramid (Robinson and Sprinkle, 1969). However, as we will see later, it would be more appropriate to call it a siphon. This structure was previously described (Topographical Anatomy of the Skeleton, Siphon).

Internally Visible Clues

Of all the material studied, we only found internal evidence of anatomy in Ctenocystis utahensis, Etoctenocystis bohemica, Pembrocystis gallica, and Gilcidia smith. With all the available evidence, we will develop a synthetic anatomical model that captures the essence of the internal anatomy of Ctenocystoids.

1. Transverse septum

In Ctenocystis utahensis, Etoctenocystis bohemica, Pembrocystis gallica, and Gilcidia smithi, we have found evidence of an oblique transverse septum. In each species, the septum presents a different layout, both in inclination and longitudinal position.

P. 96 / 

The signs of the septum are found on the lower margin of the IPD and IFI plates; they are vertical ridges or projections, somewhat oblique and roughly directed toward each other. The upper edge of these ridges does not reach the upper frame, and the lower edge does not extend beyond the infracentral integument. When visible, this projection is conspicuous on the IPD plate and barely hinted at on the IFI plate. In these four species, the internal ridge of the IFI plate always occupies the same position at the posterior end of this plate, very close to the IFI-ILI joint. However, the position of the internal crest of the IPD plate varies from one species to another. In Ctenocystis utahensis, it is located at the anterior end of the IPD plate, next to the DIP-IPD joint. In Gilcidia smithi, it is much further back, close to the inflection point of the dorsal articular crest of this plate. Finally, in Etoctenocystis bohemica and Pembrocystis gallica, it is located near the posterior limit of the crest, immediately adjacent to the foramen.

/ P. 97

In Etoctenocystis bohemica and Pembrocystis gallica, the septum is located very posteriorly, near the posterior foramen. In Gilcidia smithi, it occupies an intermediate position, and in Ctenocystis, it is very anterior.

2. Longitudinal projections on the inner surface of the SLI and SLD plates.

Visible in some specimens of Ctenocystis utahensis. They are located in the middle or lower part of the lateral walls (longitudinal ridges) of the SLI and SLD plates. They have a horizontal and sinuous course with their posterior ends descending.

3. Upper border of the anterior inner angle of the IFI-IED plates

On the upper border of the anterior inner angle of the IFI-IFD plates of Pembrocystis, there is a low, sharp ridge-like projection that almost reaches the upper edge of the horizontal processes of these plates.

4.- Inferior notch of the SED plate

P.  97 /

The SFD plate (not observed in SF1) of Pembrocystis presents a deep triangular notch surrounded by a ridge that appears to be a continuation of the structure of the previous point.

/ P. 98

5.- Longitudinal depressions in the DIP and IIF plates

In Pembrocystis gallica, very faint longitudinal depressions appear on the upper surface of the IIF and IFD plates near the base of the lateral articular ridge.

ANATOMICAL INTERPRETATION OF THE DIZONIDA

The body cavity comprises two independent cavities separated by a membrane, which we will call the anterior cavity and the posterior cavity. On the sides of the inner surface of the lower marginal frame, there is clear evidence of the existence of a membranous transverse septum. This septum was oblique, with the right end set back or very far back with respect to the left. This membrane, as evidenced by the longitudinal projections on the inner surface of the SLI and SLD plates, continued forward almost horizontally, lying about three-fifths of the total height of the body cavity. In Ctenocystis, we have not found evidence of this membrane at the anterior end of the body cavity, perhaps as a result of its layout coinciding with the IFI-SFI and DIP-SLD joints. However, on the upper edge of the anterior inner angle of the IFI plate of Pembrocystis, we found evidence that this horizontal membrane reached the corners of the mouth.

P. 98 /

The anterior cavity occupied the anteroinferior end of the cavity and was limited anteriorly by the vertical elements of the rastrellum (bodies of plates ICl and ICD, vertical walls of the angles of plates IFI and IFD, and the lateral tubercles of these plates). The lateral boundaries were the vertical ridges of plates IFI and IFD, the anterior part of plate IPD, and the lower part of plates SLI, SLD, SFD, and probably SFI. The upper and posterior boundaries were the embrana, which we assume existed between the ridges and structures observed on the walls of the body cavity.

/ P. 99

The posterior cavity occupied the posterior part of the body cavity, projecting toward the mouth above the anterior cavity. In Pembrocystis, Etoctenocystis, and Gilcidia, this cavity was limited to the posterior part of the body cavity, while in Ctenocystis it occupied almost the posterior half of the cavity.

In Gilcidia, Pembrocystis, and Etoctenocystis, the anterior cavity was protected ventrally by skeletal lamellae that rigidified the ventral integument; these lamellae are the posterior tabs of the ICI and ICD plates and the inner laminar expansions of the marginal plates of the IFI and DIF rastrellum. However, the posterior cavity is directly linked to the body parts capable of contraction.

P. 99 /

The posterior cavity opens to the exterior through the posterior cone (= anal pyramid s. Robinson and SPRINKLE 1969). Although, as previously mentioned, it also projected above the anterior cavity toward the upper part of the mouth. If the ctenidia apparatus, as we propose in the next chapter (Structure and Function), was capable of pumping and filtering water, a large mouth would not have been necessary to ingest filtered food particles. Therefore, the large mouth of ctenocystoids must have been related to the entry of large bodies of water (see Structure and Function chapter), although it could have been surrounded by unskeletonized soft tissue.

/ P. 100

In Ctenocystoids, as in other carpoid classes, the mouth was probably associated with a large pharynx. In this work, we interpret the posterior cavity as a pharynx. This argument is based on the relative positions of the body cavities and the interpretations of structure and function that we make in the following chapter. This interpretation is further supported by the interpretation of the internal anatomy of Cincta (DOMÍNGUEZ et al. 1994, DOMÍNGUEZ in press) and other carpoids.

Furthermore, the anterior cavity must have contained the viscera. This visceral cavity was previously associated with the mouth. It is not symmetrical either dorsally or frontally. The visceral mass is displaced to the right: at the anterior end, it is displaced to the right and upwards, surrounding the petrous canal (or petrous canal-goneal canal?), and at the posterior end, it is displaced to the right. If the only body openings connecting the visceral cavity to the outside are the mouth and the hydropore (gonopore?), and the pharynx is located between this cavity and the posterior cone, it seems likely that the anus was internal and the pharyngeal tubes were eliminated when the water contained in the pharynx was expelled through the posterior cone. In this case, it seems more appropriate to call the posterior cone a siphon.

P. 100 / P. 101

ANATOMY OF CINCTA

Unlike Soluta, Cincta lack an anterior arm. The ambulacral is biramous, recumbent, and housed in grooves on the anterior surface of the animal. Since the mouth is located at the anterior right end of the body, the two ambulacral branches differ in size and are not symmetrical. Gyrocystís, more specifically, has a reduced or absent right ambulacral.

The anus is located at the anterior left end of the dorsal integument (FRIEDRIcH 1993). To the left of the mouth is the operculum, which covers and closes a single gill slit. The pharynx was probably very wide and bulbous or pear-shaped. The gonopore-hydropore is located on the dorsal integument, just behind the mouth. Friedrich (1993) was the first to recognize this pore and identified it as a hydropore, perhaps associated with a gonopore. Some specimens of Cincta show, below this pore, a double groove on the surface of the marginal plates (DOMÍNGUEZ in press). The anterior groove, which is much larger in extension and depth, can be interpreted as the impression in the skeleton of the stone canal, while the posterior groove may have been associated with the gonads, which left lobed impressions on the inner surface of the right marginal plates from the position of the hydropore-gonopore to the vicinity of the tail or stele insertion. Additionally, Jefferies (1997) supports this idea based on homologies with the Dendrocystoides solute previously redescribed in Jefferies (1990).

P. 101 / P. 102

The digestive tract of the Cincta probably included an oral cavity located immediately adjacent to the mouth in the body cavity. The oral cavity is indicated by the apposition of possible ligamentous insertions located on the inner surface of the dorsal integument and below the groove of the petrous canal. The oral cavity must have had a strong connection with the pharynx, and there may have been a short esophagus that connected the oral cavity to the intestine (DOMÍNGUEZ et al. 1994, GIL et al. 1998,
DOMÍNGUEZ in press). The intestine was horizontally U-shaped and distally (straight) had a sharp upward inflection until it reached the anus, which was located at the apex of a small cone of acicular ossicles at the anterior left angle of the integument.

The pharynx must have possessed a strong, conical parent muscle that inserted posteriorly at the base of the tail. This muscle left impressions on the upper surface of the ventral integument of many Cincta specimens, so the intestine must have necessarily passed over this muscle.

P. 102 /

Cincta must have been active suspension feeders. Contraction of the conical pharyngeal muscles could have forced water out through the frontal gill slit. The force of the exhaled water could have slightly opened the operculum. Once the pharyngeal muscle was relaxed, the body could regain its shape thanks to the elastic recovery of the skeletal joints, and water would necessarily enter through the mouth, as the operculum would function as a non-return valve. The ambulacra could have channeled water toward the mouth and captured some food particles. An opening covered and protected the ambulacrum and could prevent the entry of particles that were too large.

/ P. 103

P. 103 / P. 104

[blank]

P. 104 / P. 105

CHAPTER 6:  Structure and Function
=============================

CHAPTER 7
==========

Introduction
We can see how the use of the terms taxonomy, systematics, classification, and biological system obey disparate criteria that
sometimes turn out to be very similar. In the field of paleontology in particular, two of the terms referred to by
Minelli 1993 are predominantly used: taxonomy and systematics. Sometimes, the choice of one or the other follows criteria of tradition, authorship, or even editorial standards (e.g., Paleontology prefers systematics).
A relatively large number of authors believe that taxonomy is a discipline included in systematics. According to these authors, taxonomy is the discipline that deals with the classification, nomenclature, description, and aids for the identification of organisms, such as identification keys, tables, etc. For its part, systematics includes, in addition to taxonomy, other disciplines such as reproductive systems and genetics, phylogeny and evolutionary processes, biogeography and synecology (Hawksworth and Bisby 1988). As these last authors and Minelli 1993 observe, the substantial increase in the fields currently studied by taxonomists has given taxonomy imprecise limits that in practice are often confused with those of systematics. Thus, it is not surprising that in practice the terms are interchangeable (A. Minelli pers. comm. October 1997), and are even considered synonyms (Ax 1984, 1988). For our part, we consider the opinion of Hawksworth and Bisby 1988 to be correct, and this is reflected in the title of this chapter: However, because the boundaries between taxonomy and systematics have become very blurred, and as A. Minelli pointed out, especially for practical purposes, we understand that both terms can be used interchangeably.
Background

The Class Ctenocystoidea was described by Robison and Sprinkle (1969)
after the discovery of a new species of carpoid, Ctenocystis utahensis Robison and Sprinkle, 1969, which could not be assigned to any of the previously known carpoid classes (Jaekel, 1900, 1918). Following this description, these same authors (SPRINKLE and Robison 1978, p. T998) created the Family Ctenocystidae based on the only genus known to date, Ctenocystis Robison and Sprinkle, 1969 (type genus by monotypy).
The Class Ctenocystoidea remained monospecific until 1985, when two independent research teams separately reported the discovery of two new species: Ctenocystis jagoi (JELL, BURRET, and BANKS, 1985) and Etoctenocystis bohemica (FATKA and KORDULE, 1985), the latter assigned to the new genus Etoctenocystis (FATKA and KORDULE, 1985).

Ctenocystoid species are assigned. “[sic] UBAGHS and ROBISON, 1988, p. 4). Therefore, the Order Ctenocystida UBAGHS and ROBISON, 1988, is coextensive with the Family Ctenocystidae Sprinkle and Robison, 1978 and with the Class Ctenocystoidea Robison and Sprinkle, 1969.
The last work on the taxonomy of Otenocystoidea was published by DzIK and ORtOwSKI (1995), in which the new family Jugoszoviidae DzíK and ORLowsKI, 1995 was described, which includes a new genus and a new species, Jugoszovia archaeocyathoides DZIK and ORlzOWSKI, 1995. This new species was described on material previously assigned to different species of Archaeocyathidae (ORt.owSKI, 1959 and 1964) and interpreted as carpoids by SPRINKLE (1973, p. 111) and DERSTLER (1985, fig. 3-11). The new Family Jugoszoviidae was described as belonging to the Class Ctenocystoidea but was not assigned to the only Order described for the Class (Order Ctenocystoidea UBAGHS and RoBIsON, 1988).

Therefore, to date, the Class Ctenocystoidea has consisted of one Order (O. Ctenocystida), two Families (Fam. Ctenocystidae and Fam. Jugoszoviidae), three genera (Ctenocystis, Etoctenocystis, and Jugoszovia), and six species (CL. utahensis, Ct. jagoL, CL. colodon, CL. smith, E. bohemica, and J. archaeocyathoides).
This chapter describes the four morphological types in the Class Ctenocystoidea, which group all species known to date, and assigns them each Order status. The taxonomy of the Class is reviewed, and all taxa with Order, Family, Genus, and Species status are described or redescribed, specifying their diagnostic characters. Additionally, the new taxa proposed in this work are described. The classification of fossils is a matter of dispute and involves some somewhat confusing concepts that require some explanation. Cladistically speaking, fossils differ from living organisms in two fundamental respects (CRASKE and JEFFERIES 1989):
1. Living organisms are better known than fossils, both in terms of the number of species and what is known about each of them.
2. Living organisms are strictly contemporary, while fossils can differ considerably in age.
These circumstances, especially the latter, make it difficult to use the same systematic criteria for both. The fact that living organisms are better known than extinct ones has a particular impact on the starting point of systematic work, since these are based, at least initially, on living organisms that have been grouped according to certain criteria. The introduction of extinct organisms into this system forces us to confirm, readjust, or rectify the main criteria. These are, therefore, collateral branches to the main lineage, formed for the most part by only one species.
The fundamental concept of cladistics is that of a monophyletic group (sensu Hennig, = holophyletic sensu Ashlock), which includes, by definition, all descendants of a basal species. However, as we will see below, this definition will be adjusted.
Monophyletic groups can be grouped in pairs based on their proximity. Let us consider two monophyletic groups of extant organisms that are closer to each other than to any other group, which we will call, for example, groups 1 and 2. These groups will therefore be sister groups. We will observe that when considering the fossil record, we will have two ways different ways of delimiting each of these groups. Consider, for example, group 2. The most restricted delimitation will include all descendants, present or extinct, of the last common ancestor (y) of all current members of group 2; we will call this set of organisms terminal group 2 (=crown group, cF of Jefferies 1979, 1990, Craske and Jefferies 1989, and which is almost equivalent to *Groupe de Hennio 1969, 1981). The broadest delimitation of group 2 is not easy to define; it will include, in addition to terminal group 2, all descendants of the common ancestor of groups 1 and 2 (the nodal species x) that do not belong to group l. This set of organelles
The terms terminal group (= JEFFERIES crown group) and Group * (= *HENNINO group), although conceptually different—since the former includes the nodal species and the latter does not—can in practice be considered synonymous, since positive identification of the nodal species will generally not be possible.
If we subtract the terminal group 2 from the total group 2, we obtain an extinct paraphyletic group that we will call the basal group (= JEFFERIES stem group); in the latter, we must distinguish the stem lineage of group 2, which is composed of the direct sequence of ancestors of this group taken from the common ancestor of groups 1 and 2 to the ancestor.


common to all members of group 2 (Ax 1985, JEFFERIES 1986). In JEFFERIES' definition, both common species (x and y) are excluded from the basal lineage. By the very definition of a basal group, every fossil can be attributed to a basal group of a given terminal group. However, the identification of this basal group can be complicated, and one of the most difficult tasks in establishing a phylogeny is precisely the positive identification of the correct basal group.
Characters that develop in basal lineage 2 and are retained in the [1+2]p type, or two sister groups form a monophyletic group of higher rank than their own.
The autapomorphies of a group do not necessarily have to be present in all members of the group, as they may have been secondarily lost in some of its members or even lost in all extant members of the group. An autopomorphy should not be defined if and only if that trait persists in all current members of a group, but rather as a characteristic that appears in the basal lineage of a group and persists, at least, until the end of that lineage.
Throughout the basal lineage, we can recognize successive changes such as the appearance, modification, or disappearance of a trait. These changes occur at specific times and allow us to differentiate segments within the basal lineage of a group in which there are different degrees of relationship or proximity to the terminal group. The set of forms or members included In this segment or in the collateral lineages derived from it, we will call it a plesion (PATTERSON and ROSEN 1977). Each plesion is characterized by having achieved a change with respect to the previous one and not having carried out the next. We can order the plesions in a sequence, such that a plesion will be more or less close to the summit group (more or less crownward in the terminology of Jefferies 1986). The term "crownward" was proposed by Jefferies 1986, p. 13 to designate greater proximity to the terminal group.
The m
ber and therefore its appearance within the basal lineage (Jefferies, Lewis, and Donovan 1987). According to the definition of plesion by Patterson and Rosen 1977, since they introduced the term "sister group," it follows that plesions are monophyletic; However, Jefferies, Lewis, and Donovan (1987) define a plesion as "all members of a basal group that, as far as we can discern, are equally close to the terminal group." This definition implies—since it excludes some of the descendant forms—that a plesion is, by definition, necessarily paraphyletic. A plesion incorporates two distinct constituents into its topological structure (Jefferies 1988):
1. A portion of a basal lineage that begins with the incorporation of an autapomorphy and ends with the appearance of the next recognizable mutation in the basal lineage.
2. All the derivations and collateral branches of this portion of the basal lineage.

However, a defined and formally accepted plesion can be subdivided into two or more plesions as autapomorphies not previously considered or taken into account are discovered, with one closer to the summit group than the other. The division procedure is based on the search for characters shared with the terminal group, but not with others (JEFFERIES, LEWIS, and DoNovAN 1987); however, this characteristic does not necessarily reveal the relationships between the taxa involved. This concept is closely related to the concept of soft-polytomies of MADISON and MADISON 1991, which we will describe later in the chapter "Phylogeny." Furthermore, a plesion can also be defined by two nested monophyletic groups, the larger including the smaller. Thus, a plesion will be defined as the difference between the two monophyletic groups. CRASKE
and JEFFERIES 1989 proposed the term "scion" to refer to these embedded monophyletic groups, such that a scion will be composed of partially extant and partially extinct monophylies. A scion is named for the contained plesion furthest from the terminal group.
This situation will be complicated when establishing phylogenies of the collateral branches of a plesion. By definition, a plesion (in the sense of JEFFERIES, LEWIS, and DONOvAN 1987 and not in that of PATTERSON and ROSEN 1977) will include a segment of the basal lineage plus all the collateral branches that start from that segment. These collateral branches can host single species in the most basic case, but in complex cases, we can find truly complicated partial trees. In this sense, CRASKE and JEFFER!ES (1989) proposed a system for subdividing the portions of a plesion. In one of these collateral trees, we can distinguish a main axis that contains the largest number of segments (internodes), with two second-order segments at its end. The process of subdividing paraplesions is an iterative process in which the order number of the differentiated branches (or subtrees) increases. The criteria for selecting an apical group may not be objective; generally, we will use the pair of species that, in terms of internodes, is furthest from the basal lineage. The
discovery of new extinct taxa will alter the topology of a tree, so as CRASKE and JEFFERIES (1989) point out, this pair of species will constitute a provisional first-order apical group. Occasionally, other more operational criteria may be used, such as the selection of an emblematic species, such as the type species of a higher-ranking taxon (genus, family, etc.).
This chapter combines the criteria used in classical or Linnaean taxonomy with cladistic classification, which designates monophyletic and paraphyletic groups according to the terminology previously described. Thus, systematic paleontology will follow a cladistic framework consistent with the phylogenetic hypothesis proposed in the Phylogeny chapter. This systematic approach has recently been used in some chapters of "The Fossil Record 2" (BENTON 1993), including the one devoted to basal deuterostomes, which include the various carpoids (BENTON in BENTON 1993, pp. 529-535).

There is currently a widespread opinion among taxonomists that the only valid criterion for defining a taxon is that of a natural group (=monophyletic). In our opinion, this would be desirable. However, in practice, the positive identification of monophyletic groups will not always be possible, so there will be areas of uncertainty in the proposed phylogenetic hypotheses (=phylogenetic trees). Among these, two are of particular interest to us, and we have previously referred to them as metataxa and plesion (or paraplesion). In the specific case of plesions, they were originally proposed by PATTERSON and ROSEN (1977) as monophyletic groups. However, from an operational point of view, for paleontological studies, the concept proposed by JEFFERIES, LEWIS, and DONOvAN (1987) is more appropriate, given that we follow the criterion of assigning each species apical positions on the branches, excluding anagenesis from the general phylogenetic hypothesis. This same criterion extends to paraplesions, which are topologically similar in structure to plesions.
This taxonomic study includes the description of the plesion Ctenocystoidea. For the subdivisions of this plesion, we will follow the terminology developed by CRASKE and JEFFERIES (1989). For this purpose, we will designate the genus Ctenocystis as the first-order apical group. The selection of Ctenocystis over its sister group, Gilcidia gen. nov., responded to the previously cited emblematic species criterion. The recent discovery of Gilcidia viviannae gen. nov. sp. nov. (May 1998) has increased the number of Gilcidia gen. nov. taxa to three. However, the phylogenetic relationships among the three species will remain unresolved until additional G. viviannae material is discovered.

On the other hand, since the phylogenetic relationships of Pleurozonida and Dizonida do not seem to have been properly established, we will use the metataxon concept of GAUTHIER 1986.

Monozoned morphological type:

This morphological type is exclusive to the genus Courtessolea. The body shape is very depressed, broad, and robust. The marginal plates have a triangular section and are homologous to the marginal plates of Cincta. The rastrellum is broad and conspicuous, with the four plates (FI, Cl, CD, and IED) clearly differentiated and does not reach the lateral margin of the theca. The ctenidium surrounds the mouth, and its plates even insert on the underside. The exhalant area of ​​the ctenidium is peripheral and dorsolateral. These forms are adapted to an epibiont lifestyle.

Pleurozonal morphological type:

This morphological type is exclusive to the genus Jugoszovia. The body has a depressed shape, much wider at the anterior end than at the posterior. The ctenidium is subannular, very depressed, kidney-shaped, and similar in appearance to the Monozonate morphological type. It has two frames of very small, residual marginal plates. The dorsal and ventral integumentary plates are laminar, polygonal in outline, and maintain contact with the adjacent plates. As in the previous morphotype, the exhalant area is peripheral and dorsolateral. These forms are thought to be adapted to an epibiont lifestyle.

Azonated morphological type:

This morphological type is exclusive to the genus Conollia.
The body shape is cylindrical, elongated, and without a distinct marginal frame. The ctenidium forms a hemispherical anterior cap with a neck at its base. The exhalant area is probably located at the base of the ctenidium, just above the neck. The plates of the rastrellum differ only in size and position from those of the ctenidium. The SOC plate has a residual body and a hypertrophied rostrum. The body integument is very light, with very thin laminar plates formed by a retiform stereoma and armed with thin spiniform external processes. We attribute a semi-infaunal lifestyle to it.

Dizonado morphological type:

This morphological type includes the genera Ctenocystis, Pembrocystis, Etoctenocystis, and Gilcidia. They are moderately depressed forms with conspicuous upper and lower marginal frames. The section of the marginal plates is T-shaped. The insertion of the ctenidial plates is dorsolateral, never inferior. The rastrellum constitutes the anterior half of the lower marginal frame. The dorsal and ventral integumentary plates are small in diameter, very thick, and widely separated from each other. Representatives of this morphotype have a lateral body canal that acts as an exhalation area. They are forms adapted to an epibiont lifestyle, presumably active.

Of the four morphological types described, the Dizonate type is the best represented. This morphological group has the largest number of known species (four genera and six species) as well as a relatively high number of collected specimens (more than 3,000 specimens of Ctenocystis utahensis and more than 300 of Etoctenocystis bohemica). In contrast, each of the other morphological types is represented by a single species each. These circumstances, in principle, presuppose a differential understanding of each of the four morphotypes and, therefore, of their internal evolutionary tendencies. However, the structural differences found between each of the described morphotypes are much greater than those found between species of the Dizonate morphological group, which is the best known. The internal differences found between species in this morphological group basically affect proportions and ornamentation of body parts, which are perfectly correlated between the different species of this morphological group. Thus, the differences between the four morphological types prove to be efficient taxonomic markers that justify the creation of new high-ranking taxa, for which reason we propose new Orders.

The Order Ctenocystida (UBAGHS and ROBISON, 1987) was proposed to complete the taxonomic hierarchy that previously existed for Ctenocystoidea (UBAGHs and ROBISON, 1987, p. 4), grouping all Ctenocystoidea species. It was therefore an Order coextensive with the concept of Class Ctenocystoidea. The International Code of Zoological Nomenclature, 39th Edition (ICZN 1985) regulates the nomenclature of low-ranking taxa (from infrasubspecies to superfamily). Proposals were made in the Copenhagen Decisions on Zoological Nomenclature (1953, articles 59-69) and in the Colloquium on Zoological Nomenclature of the XV International Congress of Zoology (1958) to regulate the nomenclature of high-ranking taxa (those referring to orders or phyla). However, these proposals were never binding and were not included in either the current edition of the ICZN (3rd ed., 1985), the draft of the 49th edition (which will enter into force on January 1, 2000), or the Biocode proposals (GREUTER et al. 1996). Currently, there is no regulation for high-ranking taxa, and they are subject to the discretion of taxonomists (M. A. Zarazaga, personal comm., 1997). The discovery and description of new forms of Ctenocystoids that expand the spectrum of the Class to four distinct morphological patterns makes it advisable to propose new high-ranking taxa. Thus, we propose four new Orders, which reflect the characteristics previously described in this work for each of the morphological patterns proposed in the previous chapters on Morphology and Anatomy. The diagnostic criteria for these new Orders are diverse, but the essence of their differences lies in the construction of the body skeleton, and more specifically in the existence, shape, and arrangement of the skeletal ossicles that shape the body of these animals. For this reason, we propose mnemonic, euphonious, and short names that capture the essence of the concept of the proposed taxa in relation to the marginal plate framework. For these names, we have selected Greek terms, preferring those most commonly used in other related groups in order to easily differentiate them from those already proposed for these groups. Thus, we will use the root term zone (from the Greek t&vr¡, belt, girdle, girdle) in reference to the frame of marginal plates. Modifying this root, we will use the prefixes Pleuro- (from the Greek nXnp&, side), A- (from the Greek &, privative, lacking), Mono- (from the Greek llevo-, a compositional element meaning "unique" or "one"), and Di- (from the Greek 61;, a compositional element meaning "two"). Finally, we will use the ending -ida because it is the most commonly used among the orders described in the related Classes.

The new taxonomic catalog (Linnaean and phylogenetic) and identification keys for the Class Ctenocystoidea are proposed below. The systematic phylogenetic catalog is based on the results presented in the Phylogeny chapter.

Linnaean Taxonomic Catalog

Class Ctenocystoidea Robison and Sprinkle, 1969.
MISSING
Order Dizonida ord. nov.
Family Pembrocystidae Fam. nov.
Genus Pembrocystis gen. nov.
Pembrocystis gallica sp. nov.
Family Ctenocystidae Sprinkle and Robison, 1978.
Genus Etoctenocystis Fatka and Kordule, 1985.
Etoctenocystis bohemica Fatka and Kordule, 1985.
Genus Gilcidia gen. nov.
Gilcidia smithi<Ubaghs, 1987) comb. nov. 
Gilcidia jagoi (dell, Burret and Banks, 1985) comb. nov. 
Gilcidia viviannae sp. nov. 
Genus Ctenocystis Robison and Sprinkle, 1969. 
Ctenocystis utahensis Robison and Sprinkle, 1969. 
Ctenocystis colodon Ubaghs and Robison, 1988.

====
SOD and SOl plates are oval, twice as wide as they are long. The posterior edge of the SOC plate is rounded. The posterior tabs of the ¡Cl and ¡CD plates are very wide. The supracentral plates are regularly distributed, while the infracentral plates are orthogonal. Genus Gilcidia gen. nov. (8)
8. - IFD and ¡FI plates with a constriction at the base of the anterior tooth. The outer lateral surface of the body of the IFD and ¡FI plates is narrower than the inner surface. The anterior tooth of the IFD and ¡FI plates is oblique with respect to the body of the plate. Gilcidia viviannae gen. nov. sp. nov.
- IFD and ¡FI plates without constriction at the base of the anterior tooth; the lamellar area of ​​the tooth comes into contact with the body of the plate. The lateral surfaces of the body are of similar proportions. Anterior tooth axis of the DIP and IFI plates
sub-perpendicular to the body of these plates (9).
9. - Robust body. Supracentral plates arranged in a staggered pattern. ICI and IFI plates with sharp posterior tabs, between which are located infracentral ossicles. Gilcidia smithi (Jell, Burret, & Banks, 1985) (comb. no. 11).
- Gracile body. Supracentral plates arranged orthogonally. ICI and IFI plates with rounded posterior tabs, between which are not located infracentral ossicles. Gilcidia smithi (Ubaghs, 1987) (comb. nov.)

--------

1
A species is a population of interfecund individuals, separated by mechanisms that prevent crossing with other populations.

2
Jefferies proposed this terminology using agronomic terms that represent the parts of a tree (stem; crown) and felling and pruning operations (scion). Moreover, these types of similarities are widespread among cladists (e.g., pruning; brush; branch).


