23

On a side road between Sörby and Blacksta Gästgifvaregårdar, the transitional limestone layer is encountered at Hällebråten, miles from the latter-mentioned gästgifvaregårdar. In the grayish limestone there are common Orthoceratites, large pygdia of Asaphus expansus? and Sphæronites pomum 1) (Echinosphærites pom. Wahlenb.)

46

Mösseberg, Betstorpsklef. The diorite mass, which in the lowest part of the stepped layer transitions to Aphanite, which is thin-shale, with a dense earthy fracture, rests on a seemingly burnt-out yellow-gray clay schist, which further down in the layer has lost various shades of black and gray and also one, of reddish-brown color, with gray-green stripes and spots. In the dark grey slate Sphæronites aurantium is found and in the light, Graptolithes, Orthoceratites tenuis Wahlenb., Asaphus mucronatus, etc.

Karleby. On the road between Leaby and Torbjörntorp you will find the Djupdalsbäcken stream, which with several breaks between vertical walls, is cut through the limestone and alum schist layers, as well as part of the sandstone. The lower limestone beds consist of blue-grey dense limestone, with interspersed cubic iron chert. Common Orthoceratites and tails of Asaphus expansus.

The Fåredalsberget has, except at the alum schist quarries at Oltorp and Kaflås, been

47

At Vesterplana and many other places on Kinnekulle, Sphæronites pomum (Echiuo sphærites pom. Wahlenb.), large Orthoceratites, Lithuites,

48

large tails of Asaphus Heros Dalm. and As.expansus, Helicitesobvallatus Wahlenb.m.m. occur. In the alum schist layer at Hönsäter, the Battus lævi recently discovered by DalmanIt is remarkable that, except for the rare Sphæronites aurantium, which is only found in the upper schist layer at Mösseberg, all other Sphæronites, both in the Vestgöta mountains, as well as on Öland and in Dalarne, always lie embedded in the gray limestone, never in the reddish brown; while one nevertheless finds Orthoceratites, Palæads, etc. without regard to the color of the limestone. That certain genera are confined within certain strata, such as O. lenus and Battus within the shale strata, etc., is generally known,

195 - 197

The largest amount of petrifactions is collected at Böda harbour, in the outcrops of grey limestone exposed by the sea swell. One sometimes finds Asaphus angustifrons Dalm., more commonly Orthis demissa Dalm., Orthis pecten Dalm., Delthyris subsulcata Dalm., Terebratula plicatella W., small Madrepores and Millepores, pieces of Encrinite stems? but especially in great abundance such calcareous balls, which were first assumed by Gyllenhal to be fossilized Echini 1), but were later described by Wahlenberg under the name of Echinosphærites, which genus I thought I found reason to include among the Echinodermata Cuvier, under the shorter name Sphæronites, after I obtained at Böda a specimen with an attached piece of the stem and also many with clear marks of the stem attachments, which leads me to place these bodies between the Encrinite and Echinite families, as endowed with stems and a kind of buds, corresponding to the crowns of the Encrinites 2). A similar example is given by Schlotheim, who in Isis 1) described and drew a so-called Echinosphærites granatum from Ösel, with a piece of the stem, and to which a corresponding one, though without a stem, has been found on Gotland. Von Meyer has also described and copied a similar object from an unknown place 2). From the similarity of the buds and openings to Echini, he calls it Echino-Encrinites Senkenbergii. This bud is pear-shaped, covered with four rows of 5- and 6-cornered shields, the stem attached in the middle of the thick end. Also on Kinnekulle Dalman found a completely preserved ball of Sphæronites pomum, with a clear mark of the broken stem. All this seems to indicate that the same relationship of free or attached bodies, which takes place between Asterias, Euryale and Comatula on the one hand, and the Encrinites or Crinoids on the other, is found analogously between the Echinites and the Sphæronites. - On Öland these balls of two species occur: Sphæronites po

1) Vet. Acad. Handl. 1772 p. 245.

2) Tab. V. fig. 1-4.

mum, Tab. V. fig. 2, 3, 4 and Sphæronites granatum, Tab. V. fig, 1., by Gyllenhal 1) and Wahlenberg 2) so extensively described that further effort would be superfluous. I may only add that Sphæronites granatum has never yet been found, either on Öland or at Furudal in the Dalarna, with a stalk, only with the two opposing openings or so-called rostra; that Spær. pomum also generally occurs in the same way, without marks of larger stalk attachments (T. V, fig. 3) 3); that the finely punctured surface, surrounded by small meshes, which is nevertheless most often destroyed, is exactly the same on the specimens taken from Kinnekulle; that the smooth fragments of stems, which resemble those of the Encrinites and lie scattered in the limestone both on Öland and at Furudal, perfectly resemble the stumps which are still attached to the head or crown of the Sphaeronite and which they thus to

1) Anf, st,

2) Act, soc. sc. Ups. VIII. p. 53, 54.

3) Perhaps these have arisen from the side of the stem, not from the ends?

hear 1); that they occur of all sizes, from less than, to between one and two inches in diameter, often pressed out of their regular form and filled, either with dense mass of rock, or most often with pyramidal calcite crystals, the tips of which point towards the middle; and finally, that they lie clustered together in families between certain rock fragments, always in the grey, never in the reddish-brown limestone.

In the Alunskifter and Orsten layers near southern Möckleby, no other petrifactions are known than Olenus gibbosus and Ol. Scarabæoides, and Atrypa? lenticularis Dalm. (Anomites lenticul. Wahlenb.); the latter is small and invexed in the stone, which makes it difficult to determine correctly.

1) Could the articulated, Encrinite-like stems, of which impressions are often found in the uppermost slate layers of Ålleberg and several of the Vestgöta mountains, be the stems that supported Sphæronites aurantium, which occurs in these layers? A similar conjecture also holds true in regard to the peculiar bodies and stem stumps that occur in a rock type corresponding to the Vestgöta slate layer at Fangberg in Norrige, described and reproduced in Volume III of these Notes, pp. 88, 89, Tab. III.
