PAGE 239

DESCRIPTION
On the few so-called Cryftall-åplen and lime-balls, such as petrified animals of the genus Echin; or their near-dead bodies :
Written by
JOH. ABR. GYLLENHAHL,;
Aufc. in the Royal College of Archaeology.

To this end, these balls have not been identified from the remains of animals: but only from NE when they contained lime; and from temporarily formed lime-glands; when the shell was thick with lime.

PAGE 240

They were mentioned:

1. By Mr. Landshöfdingen and Commander Baron Tilas in Ki Sv. Vet. Acad. Handl. 1740. p 196: Each year's Tab. IL £ 18, drawing attached of the fragmented Cryftåll-åplen from the Osa mundsberg in Råttwik Parish in the Dalarne.

2. By Herr Arch. and Ridd. v. Linnaeus, in his Öland Refa; p. 136.

"Crystal-åplen I call the spherical feet, found in the limestone mountains; to the size of the feet; which found flakes resemble a hematite, and consist of very fine and transparent Spat crystals, which go together in the center, sometimes leaving a small hollow in the center; if you look closely, you can see their triangular shape. These Crystall-åplen are quite common on Öland &c." Ibid. p. 196.

3. By Herr Arch, v. Linnaeus in Muaf. Teffin, p. 80. n. 3 and
4. By Herr Arch, v. Linnaeus in Syft. Nat. 12. upl. 3. Tom. p. 179. Gen. 46. n. 4.

Ætites ( marmoreus ) marmoreus, embryonibus fixis crystallinis, Natri Byodontis. Cf. p. 93..0. 14.

5. By Mr. Profeff, and Ridd. Doct. Kalm in Våftg. and Bobus-Lånfka Refan, p. 285

Crystal-pole, they had at Västerplana on Kinnekulle in abundance, often lying close to each other; in a dry clay island on a rocky slope, called by the few white feet.

6. By Mr.: Prof. and Ridd; J. G, WALLERIUS, 1 Dels Mineralogie p. 62. 5.

"Of conical, truncated, five-sided; along with some five-sided Spat crystals the most Spat-globes are composed, found in the Valleys. A few conical crystals are shown in fig, 6." Ibid. p. 63. 12. Round spat-balls.

PAGE 241 (IN ABOVE ¶)

7. By Mr. Bergmoft. CRONSTEDT, in his Introduction to a New Mineralogy p. 11. , Crystalli pyramidales concreti: Spat-globe of eight-foot-long limestone crystals, from the Ofmundsberget.

Bergs-R. LEHMANN writes in his Introduction to a Geographia Subterranea of the Brandenburg Lands (followed by his presentation of the Geschichte der Höåltzgebiirgen) p. 46, a small limestone-globe, which at first sight comes very close to our Crystal-globes, but surpasses the few in their variety, so that they cannot be assigned to one and the same species. In the meantime, I should have mentioned them, because they, if they happen, may have reason to follow, if they do not at least have some such origin. Mr. LEHMANN describes fine Spat balls as follows: "Nicht weit von Laublingen findet I fich in: einem Berge eine art Spat-kugeln, ofters als ein Kopf grofs, åusferlich fehen folche eckig , als fo genannte Mergel-nuffe, aus; wenn man fie zerfchlågt, fö zerfpringen fie allezeit in viereckigte pyramidalifche körper, deren fpitze in den mittelpunét diefer kugeln zufammenlåuft, naeh der peripherie aber die unterfte breite balin formiren: von farbe find fie gelb &c." Mr. Bar. TILAS mentions, loco cit., a flag of chalk balls of about I foot in diameter and flat long-round figure, from lying in the small valley of Ofmundsberg with the small round balls, in relation to which I actually mentioned the flag. Yet these are still as unknown to others as the ones described by Mr. LEHMANN: crystal balls.

PAGE 242 (NEAR END OF ABOVE ¶)

Crystal -balls and chalk-balls are abundant in many layers of our flåtberg. In Nerike and Skaraborgs Lån I have had occasion to find them in their natural state, and also, both on them and on pieces of flåtberg from Rårtvik in Dalarna, to find so many clear signs of organic structure that I can not only prove that they are petrified, but also quite carefully examine the cut, composition and surface of the fkalen, and from this to the accuracy of the originals.

The two remaining, quite unknown, species of: Animals; familiar with all the senses, which are common to the species of the Echini genus: Therefore, in their descriptions, I have used some of the terms that are accepted for this genus.

§2. Spec. 1.
Arch, Linné Ölåndfka Refa, p. 136.
Prof. Kalm W:göth. och Bohus L. Refa, p. 28.
I Muf, Teff: p. Son: och Syft: Nat. III
p. 179 means both species.
Description: compare Fig. 1. 2. 3. Tab: VIII

[switches to latin]

Body globose.

1. Diameter usually a finger (rarely two fingers) long.

2 Covered with skin, thin for its size.

Inflated into an oblong tumor; small in relation to the whole; gently sloping on all sides; continued into the convex-callous margin of the mouth, located at the other end of this tumor; in the same slope, facing the mouth, the anus is perforated (see, fig. I. 2. a).

PAGE 243 (NEAR END OF ABOVE ¶)

Constructed of very numerous valves; relatively small in relation to the whole skin; convex outward, concave inward (a); angular circumference; in one and the same individual varying in size and number of sides (from 3 to 10, but mostly 6, 5); irregularly arranged (b); usually uneven; distinct sutures impressed on both surfaces of the skin, externally more obsolete. To each of these valves are as many others contiguous as the sides it is constructed of.

3. Equipped with two openings; contiguous; small for the size of the animal: Of which.

a) Pentagonal mouth (with distinct angles in adult specimens; rounded in young ones); surrounded by a convex-callous margin, distinctly pentagonal, one of whose sides is common to the circumference of the cavity.

b) Oval anus; separated from the mouth by a narrow rib only, which is slightly smaller; located on the slope of the skin tumor.

PAGE 244 (NEAR END OF ABOVE ¶)

4. Lacking spines.

5. Equipped with tentacles (c) undoubtedly very numerous (although they themselves, as a softer substance, and therefore incapable of petrification, could not be completely deprived of fossil individuals): The skin is perforated on all sides by minute, orbicular pores: The small ones of which are always located within a minute lattice (d); unequal-angled; convex; usually oblong and perforated at one end of the pores; separated from the adjacent lattices (often slightly different in size, shape and position) by a very narrow, linear, usually erect lamina with an acute margin, more rarely flattened, pressed against the skin with an obtuse margin; covered with very fine, minute, erect, conical-cylindrical, acute spines (e).

PAGE 245 (IN ABOVE ¶)

[swedish]

§3. Spec. II.

Mr. Bar. Tilas, Sv. Vet. Ac. H. 1740, p. 196. Tab. 11. Fig. 18.
Prof. J. G. Waller: Mineralogy p. 62. 5) and p. 63. 12).
Bergmåft. Crronstedt Förfök til en ny Mineralogy p. 11.
Descript. (Cf. Fig. 4————9).

[latin]

Body globose.

1. Diameter usually a quarter of a finger, or half a finger long.
2. Thinly covered with skin (compared with the skins of Echinoderms, of the same size, of others). Produced in two faces, opposite each other in diameter: unequal in size, and sometimes in a wedge, so that one is scarcely any, while the other is very prominent; closed at the apex; conical and at the same time obsolescently pentagonal; terminated by valves v, so arranged and shaped that they form the apex; varying in proportion to the whole body, with respect to size; so that in smaller individuals they are not rarely larger absolutely, but often, and indeed usually, by reason of the size of the whole animal, as in larger ones: Of which that which is larger is gradually produced, but the other more almost abrupt (f).

PAGE 246 (NEAR START OF ABOVE ¶)

Constructed of numerous valves; with a rectilinear - angular margin; in individual code various shapes (sides III, IV, V up to XIV, but mostly VI, V) and sizes; inside slightly concave, outside convex, with as many angled sides as the valve margin itself has angles (file. III-XIV as stated) (g); Irregularly arranged (h); Each very unequal; Distinct, on both skin surfaces, with impressed sutures, externally. obsolete, which lines are very thin, excavated; inflated in the center (larger usually, smaller not rarely) into a hemispherical, smooth convexity, which, if the whole valve, due to its convex shape, is compared to the nipple, refers to the gland of the same.

PAGE 247 (NEAR END OF ABOVE ¶)

Semi-perforated internally with minute, scattered, numerous, hollow points. In those valves, the center of which is inflated into an orbicular convexity, the points are more frequent around the edge of this cavity than near the edge of the valve; but the disc itself is entirely devoid of such points. In those valves, however, which enjoy a simple and equal convexity, these points occupy the disc itself mainly.

The external sculpture of the most beautiful is the following:
The center of the valve fin with the center of each of the adjacent valves is combined by a rhombic areola (i), one diameter of which (often longer) proceeds straight from one of the combined centers to the other; the other follows the suture of the valves, the areolas of the same conjoined ones. These areolas are striated according to the longer diameter; unequal in length, even those which proceed from the same center are more so, due to the unequal size of the valves, and the resulting different distance between the gills; carinated, in other specimens longitudinally (the carina is sometimes elevated, arched, coinciding with the longer diameter: see T. IX, f. 8, 9.); in others, however, transversely (the carina is impressed, straight, with a shorter diameter and the valves, following the suture of the connected areolae); in which case each areola is composed of flat triangular lobes, joined by the impressed carina itself as if to a common base (see fig. 6).

PAGE 248 (MIDDLE OF ABOVE ¶)

3. It is furnished with two openings, not far apart from each other; with the lower face always forming a triangle; and this is because of the unequal sides, because this face is more closely adjacent to the other opening. Of these

a) The mouth is a pentagon, with a lid that is very precisely closed. This lid is convex (Patellis margine angulatis (LINN. Sys. Nat. Tom. I. P. II. p. 1257 **)faces very similar in appearance); obtuse; quinquevalve; pentahedral: carinas 1. obtuse angles, longitudinal fissure fissis: Valves equilateral triangular; arcuate; smooth; equal (which by distending and contracting at will, the animal seems to be able to open and close the mouth).

b) Anus Oval; slightly diverging from the thorax; slightly further from the abdomen, two times smaller.

4. Devoid of spines &
5. Tentacles.

Many individuals of this species, especially those occurring in our mountain strata, belong to two varieties of the same species, which, when compared, differ in the following:

PAGE 249 (IN ABOVE ¶)

1. In variety A). (see Figs. 4. 5. 6. 7.) the lower part of the face is formed by a gradual production of the skin, much larger than the upper part, which is abrupt.
In B) (figs. 8. 9.) however, this is exactly the opposite.

2. In A) both faces, or at least one of them, are surrounded by a five-lobed circle, within which there is a smooth surface, devoid of the sculpture that illustrates the rest of the skin surface; with points, namely, excavated internally, and striated areolas, connecting the centers of the valves, externally: The sutures of the valves, moreover, impressed within this circle on both sides are so thin that they can hardly be noticed with the naked eye.

In B) however, the same as the rest of the skin, the sculpture on both sides is decorated on both sides.

3. In A) the face is straight;
In B) the upper part is slightly curved.

4. The valves which compose the skin of a single individual of variety A) are much more numerous and smaller than those which constitute the skin of the same individual. of variety B).

Furthermore, in each individual of variety A) the valves vary more in shape and size than in B).

In variety A they are in the same way throughout the whole shell: in B they decrease in size towards the front of both.

5. The serrated arches, which combine the centers of the valves on the external surface, are much smaller in variety A) than in B). The reason is that the valves, constituting the skin of this one, greatly exceed the valves of that one in size.

PAGE 250 (IN ABOVE ¶)

I could easily say that these varieties differ in species, due to the difference in the faces and valves, as has been said, but it is obvious, if I were to hand simultaneously the variety G), which occurs more rarely, and is of a middle nature: In which the upper face is slightly developed and the lower one much larger, as in variety B): But the valves are relatively small, indeed all the rest, as in variety A).

[Swedish]
§. 4. All hitherto known species of the Echinodermata agree in that each of them is a

[Latin]

ANIMAL mollusc : covered
Skin bony:
A) Composed of numerous valves, with an angular circumference.
B) Reticulated on both surfaces by sutures of these valves.
G) Perforated with two openings, opened by the help of certain valves; the other of which serves for the ingestion of food,. and therefore the so-called mouth, in a living animal, usually looks at the bottom: the other, however, proper for the secretion of excrement, has a different position in the specific cavities.
D) Equipped with mobile spines, not innate, but attached to the body, with the help of which the animal carries out its movement (*).
E) Perforated with pores, digested in pairs, for the control of tentacles, which the animal, while at rest, likes to attach to its bodies (*).

PAGE 251


The characteristics I have above mentioned, which are common to all known species of the Echinodermata, apply equally to the animals of the second order, of which Calcareous Balls and Crystallaceous Shells are petrified: Except that none of them are endowed with the few Spinae, with which Echinodermata are accustomed to move; and that the species described above is also without pores, and consequently without such tentacles, with which Echinodermata probe the bottom and attach themselves to other bodies.
It is clear that if these two characteristic marks are not necessary in each and every species of the genus Echini, the originals of the Kalk-balls cannot be brought under that family: and if they nevertheless come close to this classification, they could still less be referred to something else, without constituting a separate one. But since the genera are arbitrary, it is not necessary that the two above-mentioned characteristic marks (δ, ε) should form any part of the character of the genus Echini: and if they are omitted, the originals of the Kalk-balls should certainly have a place there.

PAGE 252 (NEAR START OF ABOVE ¶ DUE TO FOOTNOTE)

The descriptions themselves are few in mind, that they do equally good service under whatever genus these species are also brought under.

Among the species of the Echinodermata, few can, as described in § 2., be easily distinguished from all previously known species of the genus, Cute pororum paribus sparsis undique pertusa:

But the other, whose description constitutes the 3rd § cute poris nullis vifibilibus pertufa: by which characteristics both species can be perfectly distinguished from each other. Although these characteristics are not the only ones by which the prototypes of the calcareous balls can be distinguished from all known Echinodermata; few need and should, however, not be used, after they now provide for this purpose, sufficient, and remain so, until new species can be discovered, in which these characteristics are also found.

PAGE 253 (IN ABOVE ¶)

From the descriptions of these species it can be gathered that they are, in several respects, remarkably different, few are found among them, from all known species of Echinus; to which they nevertheless come nearer than to any other animal of the order. Thus it is still difficult to discover different species of this order, by which both these species can be related, few are found: among them, from the species of the Echinus order, which we now know: For nature does not make mistakes.

For the sake of simplicity, and because of the similarity with the now accepted way of characterizing natural species, I may be permitted to designate the former with the name of Echinus Pomum (k); and the latter with Echinus Aurantium (l).

§. 5.  It is quite unknown in what places these animals now live:
But doubtless they live under very deep sea-water; For neither they themselves, nor any of the many species; which are petrified in their beds, are ever brought up to the sea-shores.

Undoubtedly the petrified animals have both been born, lived, and died on the same beds, where their petrified remains are now found; For if the water had rolled the beds there, pebbles and gravel, of the same weight as they, would have followed them: But the beds, in which the chalk balls have hitherto been found, are whole and held together by a petrified fine layer.

PAGE 254 (IN ABOVE ¶)

Petrified remains of Echinus pomum occur in: Elötzbergen Kinnakulle, Billingen, Myffe-and Alleberg, located within Skaraborgs Lån: in a flo-lågrich tract within Kumla Parish and Hårad in Nerike (where grey limestone is quarried, for both cutting and burning, in the 1å called halle quarries): on Oland, Gothland etc. ft. Alleftådes in thick, grey limestone.

In the flötzbergen within Skaraborgs Lån, where fossil limestone is found, the layer thereof, from hyphae petrified Echinus aurantium, lies far higher up, than that in which Echinus pomum occurs. This layer is called, by Kinnekulle's stonecutters; Likhalle-berg, after the only ones from which useful materials for gravestones can be extracted, has other dry works, such as cranes, wide staircases and the like, The upper part of the layer is rougher than the strange (and is therefore called, by the farmers, the wrong one), heaped up of pure lime balls and crystal stones; of all these are: petrificats of Echinus pomum, and are called by the farmers balls.

[more stuff not yet translated.

EXPLANATION OF FIGURES

Tab. VIII (Figures 1-5) and IX (6-10)

Fig. 1. and 2. Representation of Echinus pomum in different positions, the few, partly visible to the naked eye.

a. Is a small oblong elevation, one end of which is slightly lost, but the other flows away, with a thick raised border around the mouth of the animal (b).

Partly the anus (c) fits in the elevation's movement towards the mouth.

Fig. 3. Rests a piece of the same animal, viewed through a microscope.

Fig. 4. Represents the general variety (a) of Echinus Aurantium.

a) Rostrum inferius. b) Mouth, covered with a thin 5-delta lid. c) Anus.

Fig. 5. The same in another plane.

a) Part of the rostrum inferius. b) Rosrum superias.

Fig. 6. Segment of this variety, seen through the Microscope.
a) Rostrum inferius. b) Os. c) Anus. d) Glandula valvalurum.

Fig. 7. The filling or core in this variety of Echinus aurantium.

2) Rosrum inferias. b) The filling in the raised mouth cap. C) Anus. ÅA) Glandule valvalarum. The numerous small round circles represent the fillings in the concave points, with which the shell is, on the inner side, half-folded. The raised lines mark the sutura valvalurum.

Fig. 8. and 9. Show another variety (B) of Echinus aurantium in fresh growths.
a) Rostrum inferias. b) Rostrum superias.

This variety (B) does not always have such a surface as figures 8 and 9 show: without the usual shape, as is shown in the 6th figure. On the other hand, the variety A) also occurs with the same sculpture, as shown in figs.
8, 9; even more, the shape. The variety G) is similar in this and all other respects to the variety A), except that the rostrum superior is smaller than the inferior, so it does not need to be shown in a different figure.

Fig. 10. The cut of the larger flag Valvulae in the shell of a foreign Echinite, which has been covered inside with a yellow, clear limestone crust, which is divided into pieces by fine dots, by the cut of the valve.


------

Footnote starting partway through Species I description:

(a) Hair means a completely different and more noticeable curvature of each valve than it should have, at least, on the spherical surface of the animal.
(b) This is compared with the fact that all these known Echini have 20 rows (of which every other pair is wider and every other narrower), which are met with in 2 points, which terminate each fine breath of a diameter of the body,

