Dead and petrified organic bodies, due to the remarkable illustration which both Geology and the History of organic bodies in general provide, have been long and assiduously sought after in Sweden. In the Acts of the Royal Society of Sciences of Uppsala, the first of all institutions in Scandinavia, in the years 1729 and 1790, the Commentatio Illustr. Bromelii de Petrificatis Svecanis was published. As, superstructured on this basis, in the same Acts there followed several treatments of the same kind by the Celeb. Stobaeus, the most ardent examiner of these things in the southern part of Sweden. Stobaeus used his hospitality, information, advice and library, and then in Natural History, not only from Scandinavia, but almost from the whole world of scholars, the Master saluted, the Immortal Linnaeus, who, having organized journeys through various provinces of Sweden, brought no little light scientifically, and himself reached an excellent zenith. First, the expenses of the pilgrimage were provided by the Royal Scientific Society of Uppsala, promising the happiest fruits from it with a not delusive hope. One of his first disciples, the Stockholm pharmacologist Freder. Ziervogel, offered himself as an accompanist for the visit to Gothland in 174, who, during this journey, with extraordinary diligence in searching, laid the foundations of the Royal Society Collection, which in Sweden, after the additions mentioned below, is now the largest, boasting four thousand specimens. Indeed, Ziervogelius's never-ceasing industry was constantly increasing with new additions. The exchange of specimens and the right to purchase them was very great. because foreign petrified ores were arriving from Hanover, Switzerland, England, etc. so that they easily equaled our native ores in number and price. Meanwhile, Joh. Abraham Gyllenhal, a young man of excellent character, from West Gothia, was working on the literature in Uppsala, who, under the faithful guidance of Cek b. Bergmann, had made such progress in mineralogical, geological, etc. that he would have won the palm in all these sciences if he had enjoyed a longer life. He was busy restoring the Åtvidabergen copper ore and died prematurely in 1788, at the age of 37. He had collected some of the minerals he had studied himself and some of the minerals he had collected from others, and had deposited all of them in Uppsala. It had been agreed between Gyllenhal and Ziervogel that they should combine the treasures of natural things that each had previously acquired for himself into a common treasury, and finally donate them to the Royal Scientific Society of Uppsala. For both, having been brought up in this ancient seat of the Muses, judged that the collections they had made should be preserved there for the future use of nature students. Which (as a condition was added) should be exhibited and publicly exhibited, so that the minds of the young men who flocked here might be inflamed with the same love for science, the Fatherland and the Academy that they had been inflamed with. Nor did they seem to have satisfied this laudable purpose before, when they had not only donated to Aides the repositories for minerals, herbs, insects, shells, etc., but had also assigned annual income, both for his salary, which would be spent on the collections, and for the continuous growth of these collections themselves. After Gyllenhalio died, Ziervogel carried out each of the things he had promised his friend, to the satisfaction of both. Nor did the R. Society ever allow its faith to fail in the just care of the entrusted task. After he wished this task to be entrusted to me, I thought it best to devote my efforts to arranging in its proper place those of the great abundance of specimens and varieties that still had to be separated or combined, so that I could examine the unknown and doubtful, and gradually supply what was desired. Therefore, under the Itineraries of A. 1812–1814. through the central mountains of Europe: the greatest of which I undertook, whatever new, unusual or spectacular had presented itself, as much as it was peculiar. I have tried to collect, if other reasons would permit, the R. Society gave me the task of finally returning to Sweden, so that I could visit those regions of Sweden at its own expense, which offered petrified specimens in strata that had been exposed over time, and at the same time prepare for myself an access to the collections of petrified specimens in Sweden, which are most notable to the R. Society. Therefore, the Swedish Observations on Petrified Lands are owed not only to Uppsala, with which I have collected whatever I have happened to learn about this topic, and which I would like to judge worthy of being included in the Society's archives.

-----

*) Among these, Andreas Tidström, ‘Chemie Adjunctus & Laborator ab A. 1758. denatus 1779, must be mentioned in the first place, who in his native province, Westrogothia, and other regions of his country, collected many petrified Swedish objects, which were preserved in collections established after the middle of the century.

-----

But before I proceed to the descriptions of the specimens themselves, it will be permissible to make a few prefaces, both about the collections which I visited, and about the recesses of Nature from which the petrified skill of this and the immediately preceding century has gradually drawn.

In the “Laboratory of Chemistry of the Uppsala Academy” now kept by the Professor and Knight J. Afzel, the collections of Bromelianz are preserved, to which are added various petrified specimens collected by Swedenborg, Stobe, Tidström, etc., all of which are of the greatest importance for illustrating the writings of the aforementioned primary authors. There are also deposited the Royal Collection brought from Drottningholm, with many Swedish petrified specimens, not to mention the Egyptian Hasselquistians, very notable, which were collected by Svab, Cronstedt, Bergman, etc., *), almost all of which have come into the possession of the Royal Academy of Uppsala. Therefore, when we consider all that the said building now contains, we see that such a large number of these things have arisen, such as we have not seen outside Uppsala in Sweden.

-----

*) Wallerius, who wrote most learnedly of all our writers about petrified animals, nevertheless has very few passages that specifically and accurately refer to Sweden, and he left no collections about the rest.

-----

The Royal College of Metallurgy's residences in the Royal Mint of Stockholm now house large collections of all minerals, arranged according to the series of provinces of the fatherland, among which are remarkable examples of petrification. Next to these treasures are separately stored the Hermelinian collections, arranged in the same order. More recent additions from the mountains of Sweden were said to have not yet been arranged or to be seen.

[blah blah lots of other stuff, then a bar in the text]

===========================================

Of the whole group of Linnaean Vermium, whose fossilized remains are found among us, the Echini are certainly the most perfect in various respects. The strong teeth of the mouth and the external organs of movement, devoid of spines, are the chief indications of a more perfect internal organization, constituted by a framework of multiple and more evident muscles. Therefore, since we observe that these organs are more perfect in different species, we also believe that these species are more perfect in others. Indeed, all organs contribute most to the functions of the mouth, where the mouth is in a central position and the anus is opposite it, there is no doubt; but the further the mouth is from the center, the weaker the entire voluntary mechanism becomes, until finally all organization is almost exclusively carried out by vegetative force, such as is found in corals. From these principles a scale of perfection and antiquity of the Echinites can be deduced, which is completely confirmed by their occurrence in more or less ancient strata of mountains, and which helps to follow in enumerating them.

Also, most of the now living Echini from the first tribe (with mouth and anus opposite the cenirals, Anocysti Kleinii or Cidares) have an almost spherical shape, and at the same time both the mouth organs and the stings are of moderate size. But those that died out last are distinguished by a depressed, rotular figure, which form was most suitable for the insertion of very thick nails. It seems that a certain Cidaris equipped with completely oval nails is found in a calcifode at Bahlsberg in Scania, or in some other fixed rock in Sweden, for certain I do not know; but Cidaris bowls with oblong spines are everywhere found in the conchaceous limestone of eastern-northern Scania. These narrower spines are no less remarkable than the thickest ones due to the internal substance consisting purely of perfectly crystallized and glittering calcareous spathe, in which no signs of living organization are discovered. We see that the organic covering enclosed material -so inorganic that, when organic life ceased, it could have "gone into pure spathe", which is indeed nowhere observed in living nature. — To the same tribe, that is, Cidaris in a broader sense, belongs the following species, long preserved in collections, but of which no description has yet been published *).

-----

Massive multi page footnote quoting Gyllenhaal starts here.

-----

Echinites areolatus: mouth and anus opposite the axis of the rotular shell, the region of the anus divided into six equal areolas; the central one at the edge of the anus emitting. Icon Tab III. figg. 4 5.

It is found everywhere in calcifodine at Bahlsberg in Scania; whence it is preserved in most collections of Swedish petrifiers. The shell varies from the size of a lens: larger up to Nucis vomicae; the shape of the same. so. depressed or rotular, so that the transverse diameter is twice as large as the axis between the mouth and the anus, the opening of the mouth consumes the greatest part of the lower plate of the shell, which is practically flat. Five pairs of ambulacra: constitute, completely straight; towards the upper side: the shell is slightly narrowed or decreasing in width; the margins on both sides are pierced by a series of double points, which between.series become moderately elevated ambulacra and papillose: The areas are decorated with a double row of nipples, almost as in the more common Cidars; the nipples are only slightly further apart. The upper area surrounding the anus offers the best differences of this species; for it is divided by conspicuous inscribed lines into six pentagonal tessulas or arculas, of equal size to each other; the central one of which is not pierced by any point; the lateral ones are marked with five obvious points. The opening of the anus is oblong, placed transversely, at the corner of the central areola, so that this corner is consumed together with the adjacent corners of the two nearest arculas, whereby these arculas become three so-called hexagons. In this way the anus is indeed opened outside the center of the shell, but so little that this species is not excluded from the Cidar tribe for this reason alone; this eccentric location alone is sufficient to distinguish this species from the rest of the same tribe. Furthermore, outside the six areolas ‘said’ there are five smaller, alternating, subcordate figures, the individual ones of which are placed at the apex of each ambulatory.

The second tribe of Echinitarum svecanorum is distinguished by the mouth also now central, although the anus is also located on the lower page. The upper plate of these, very regularly formed, emits five equal rays from the impervious center reaching up to the mouth, to which the fibulae or fibulatory balls: by means of a filament: are referred to by these Echinitarum; and because of this similarity they are aptly enough called Fibulares. Among the species of this. tribe, I think it is desirable to propose a new, Echinite, first.

Echinites peltiformis: central egg, triangular inframarginal anus exceeding twice the width of the mouth, contiguous ambulatory, reticulate areas, oval depressed shell Icon Tab. III. fig. 1. 2. 3.

In the calcareous stratum at Bahlsberg in Scania it is more common than others, as it is also better preserved. It is similar to E. scutiformem Leske p. 174. and Scilla de corp. marin. t. XI f 1. 2., in which however the anus is round, not at all larger ore, ambulatory from each other separated by a space exceeding their width, so that I would not mention the remarkable size of the shell of this species. Therefore I believed our Echinite to be a different species, to be designated by the subsimilar name peltiforsir. The shape of the entire shell is oval or rather subovate, due to the slightly wider end of the other; which is so depressed in height that the distance of the vertex from the mouth is scarcely more than a third of the length of the whole shell. The vertex of the shell is placed somewhat outside the centre of the upper part towards the narrower extremity, pierced by five pores at the end of the ambulae. There are in fact ten ambulae, but in pairs so close together or contiguous that there appear to be only five; transversely striated. The areas are divided by the sutures in flexures and longitudinally, and by other transverse cracks approaching the flexures of the longitudinal suture they become tessulae, exactly as in E. albogalero and vulgari, but so that the smaller tessulae, situated near the apex of the shell, emerge into raised tubercles. In the lower part of the shell all the cracks and sutures of both the ambulae and the areas disappear, and in place of the sutures small warts appear. The anus is opened entirely near the margin on the lower side: a triangular opening twice as large as the mouth. The mouth is almost in the center of the same page, exceptionally impressed: the opening is rounded, completely straight and not: in any way. coming out with an oblique lead as in the cassian Echines, As for the external face, at first glance this species is so similar to E. orbiculari that you would hardly. suspect that it is in fact much more akin to E. vulgari.

Which in our collections, from Scania, as is reported, is preserved in Ech. orbicularir its shape somewhat oval differs slightly from the Leskean icon, but I have not found any sufficient specific difference.

Echinites vulgaris, which has both the form and construction of Fibularia to the highest degree and was therefore better called E. fibularis than the others, arose from a certain Cretaceous stratum and lies everywhere throughout the coastal plains of Scania, but whether it was truly indigenous to Sweden and clung to its long-destructed strata or rather came from foreign Cretaceous mountains, is not certain.

The third tribe of our Echinites, to be distinguished by the mouth opening obliquely outside the base of the cinders and the anus ending at the other end opposite the mouth, contains the Cassides or Echinitas cassideos, so called for their unequal conical form. This includes our most frequent E. scutatus, which is not only abundantly found loose throughout all the plains of Scania, but also frequently sits alone in the Cretaceous stratum at Limhamn. However, whether E. cor angvinum was ever embedded in the Swedish chalk remains doubtful, although it is now not infrequently found on the coasts.

All the Echinites already mentioned above belong to our most recent sedimentary formations (called Flótz) and are relics of the true Echinoids. Now, however, some species remain in our older strata of the transitional formation, which in structure even recede further from the already living Echinoids. For in them no radiated conformation is ever observed, so essential to all other and related genera, nor in them any movable spines giving the ‘name’; but they all consist of a uniform globe, the axis of which exits into two more or less evident opposite rostra or poles. On the same side. the mouth and anus of the other one exit, a little removed from each other. The surface of the globe is generally more or less tesserae, which, when moved together; the presence. of the mouth and anus conformation proves that they are in some way related to Echinoids; but in reality they more closely resemble a certain Alcyonium. Their two rostra, in turns, have been in some way stumps, seem to have functioned. in the globe. feeding or constructing salt. Due to such a close resemblance to the true Echinites, I cannot beg to differ from them in some way, but to call them Echinosphaerites, distinguishing them by a different name. They are indeed of several different species.

a. Echinosphaerites Aurantium: surface tessulated as if distant from the anus.
Echinus 2. Aurantium, Gyllenhahl in Vet. Ac. Handl. 1772. p. 245 and 243. tab. 3. f. 4. 5. and tab. 9. f. 6 – 9.
Tilas Vet. Ac. Handl. 1740. p. 196. t. 11. f. 18.
Ostracion? Walch in. Naturforsch. 8. p. 259. t. 5. f. 1. 2.

It occurs, as far as I have personally experienced, only in the upper schistose layer of the Westrogotlriac and especially in the layers of the almost hard and textured felsic layer a little below the Trapp layer itself. It is somewhat larger and more perfect than the following species, as well as being of a higher and more recent origin. In size and more prominent beaks than in other pomums. It really refers to Aurantium. It is best distinguished by the five-valved mouth with a surface of about three times the size, separated by a space of several lines from the small round anal opening.

Echinosphaerites Granatum: the surface is textured and grooved, subcontiguous to the anus ori valva.
Echinus novus Hisinger in Vet. Acad. Handl. 1802. p. 189. tab 7. fig b.

We know that this species has only been collected in the northern part of Öland and in Dalecarlia at Wikarby and Furudal, that is, in regions endowed with no other layer, full of petrified rocks, than limestone. It is in a way intermediate between the preceding and following species, with a tesserae surface suitable for the former, but more akin in kind to the following mouth and anus. The surface is indeed tesserae as in the preceding, but much better expressed both by wider tesserae and by areolar lines, often elevated and more numerous within themselves. Due to these areolae, the sides. I thought the name given above was not inappropriate, referring almost to garnet stone. The mouth and anus as in the following species, however not so confluent. It never seems to have limestone crystals inside.

3. Echinosphaerites Pomum: surface punctate undivided, mouth evalv with anus flowing.
Echinus 1. Pomum Gyllenhahl in Vet. Acad. Handl. 1772.
p. 242 et 253. tab, 3. f. 1 — 3. Linnès Ólånsk. resa p. 136,

By far the most common. It is of all the transitional limestone strata of our regions, except perhaps Scania; however, specimens from a well-dissolved matrix with openings. equipped with their own are rarely obtained, and have only been collected in Kinnekulle, Westrogothia. It is completely round with a slightly prominent beak, so it best represents a small apple. The surface is rough and dotted, but hardly inscribed with lines, much less marked with any raised ridges. The mouth and anus are located in a common tubercle and almost merge. All the features of this species are less expressed than in the preceding ones; therefore it seems to constitute only the first beginning of the organization of the Echinoideae.

[and then moves on to Testacea]

