VI. DIVISION.
ÖLAND.

This narrow but 130-mile long island, parallel to the Småland coast at a distance of 3-4 miles, extended, with its broken side facing Småland, not more than 112 P. feet high, I have already tried to describe in 1802 1). Of the transitional formation that covers the entire island, no more than the two upper layers, Alum schist and Limestone, were known at that time, although I already suspected an underlying bottom layer of Sandstone, which was later discovered below Äleklinta in Aleböke parish and on the northern cape. This layer is undoubtedly contemporaneous with the sandstone formation across the strait, on Runö and at Strömsrum, which has been mentioned in the preceding 2 ), and it is quite probable that there are still more remains of it on the beach between Mönsterås and Brömsebro; but the revolution that has detached Öland from the mainland, or also submerged the strait, has at the same time separated and washed away the looser rock layers.

The limestone layer has two main layers, which are distinguished by different colors: a reddish-brown one, which seems to be the uppermost, because it has the highest position, is widespread south of Aleböke church along the island, on the central land and on the western side. The other layer of gray color, is found in the lower part of the land, north of Aleböke and along the eastern side. From the profile along the western coast it appears that the layers in this direction must sink and rise in a wave-like manner, because alum schist and limestone occur at different heights above the sea surface, between Äleklinta and southern Möckleby.

Regarding the petrificates, it is necessary to add and correct previous descriptions. Caudal shields of two, three, even four inches long of Asaphus expansus or perhaps of an unknown species, are among the most common and at Aleböke occur several inches long horns and fragments of a large species of this family, which cannot be determined as complete specimens are missing 1). In addition to these remains, the common Orthoceratite is found even more commonly, and at the Aleböke just mentioned;
Orthoceratites with oblique rings around the shell, probably the inner tube of the species that Wahlenberg calls Orthoceratites duplex. At Sandby Orthoceratites of a very pointed conical shape, or Orthoceratites turbinatus Dalm. Complete Lithuites are found on southern Alvarn, between southern Möckleby and Segerstad churches of the kind whose whorls are separate, not touching each other, or Hortolus Lithuus Montf. Helix obvallate Wahlenb. is found at Sandby, on Persnäs Alvar and fragments thereof at Böda harbour, always in grey limestone but never seen in the brown. At Äleklinta, Orthis novemradiata Dalm. 2)

-----

1) It has been called Illænus Centanrus for the time being, Dalman Vet, Ac. H. 1826, p, 261 .
2) Anomites novemrad , Wahlenberg. Acta Soe, Sc, Upsal, Vol. VIII, p. 66,

-----

The largest amount of petrifactions is collected at Böda harbour, in the outcrops of grey limestone exposed by the sea swell. One sometimes finds there Asaphus angustifrons Dalm., more commonly Orthis demissa Dalm., Orthis pecten Dalm., Delthyris subsulcata Dalm., Terebratula plicatella W., small Madrepores and Millepores, pieces of Encrinite stems? but especially in great abundance such calcareous balls, which were first assumed by Gyllenhal to be fossilized Echini 1), but were later described by Wahlenberg under the name of Echinosphærites, which genus I thought I found reason to include among the Echinodermata Cuvier, under the shorter name Sphæronites, after I obtained at Böda a specimen with an attached piece of the stem and also many with clear marks of the stem attachments, which leads me to place these bodies between the Encrinite and Echinite families, as endowed with stems and a kind of buds, corresponding to the crowns of the Encrinites 2).

-----

No new paragraph, but next line is page break and resets footnote numbers.

-----

A similar example is given by Schlotheim, who in Isis 1) described and drew a so-called Echinosphærites granatum from Ösel, with a piece of the stem, and to which a corresponding one, though without a stem, has been found on Gotland. Von Meyer has also described and copied a similar object from an unknown place. 2). From the similarity of the buds and openings to Echini, he calls it Echino-Encrinites Senkenbergii. This bud is pear-shaped, covered with four rows of 5- and 6-cornered shields, the stalk attached in the middle of the thick end. Also on Kinnekulle, Dalman found a completely preserved ball of Sphæronites pomum, with a clear mark of the broken stalk. All this seems to indicate that the same relationship of free or attached bodies, which takes place between Asterias, Euryale and Comatula on the one hand, and the Encrinites or Crinoids on the other, is found analogously between the Echinites and the Sphæronites.
