ECHINOSPHAERITES. Wahlenberg.
Under this name, Wahlenberg describes three different species of fossils, which he classifies with the echinoids based on their
spherical shape and the position of the mouth and
anus, which he believed he had found on them, but due to the lack of other parts, he
felt compelled to separate them from the echinoids. These spheres, which were also erroneously given the name of Alcyonites, occur here, as in the limestone of Sweden,
in large numbers; they are most common at Jumalasaari,
on the banks of the Pulkovka and in the ravines near Krasnoye Selo, as well as wherever the middle clayey limestone layers, to which they mainly seem to belong,
are still present. We examined several hundred in vain in order to learn their structure precisely; we always found only what Wahlenberg had said about them, and in many cases,
these characteristics were not even clearly discernible, since in some cases the surface had become unrecognizable due to the calcite crystals that frequently fill them, or where they enclosed dense
limestone, this had clogged the openings of the pores, and these fine openings escaped our observations. We therefore possess very few perfectly
well-preserved specimens from which one can ascertain their
structure.
First, we distinguish four openings of different sizes and shapes on them; Wahlenberg correctly identifies one of them as the mouth, which, however, is only recognizable in Echinosphaerites aurantium and
therefore entitles us to give the same meaning to the openings that we see in the same place in the others. It is covered by five triangular, precisely fitting flaps which, when closed, more or less protrude above the rest of the sphere's surface, and in this respect it perfectly resembles the mouth opening which we find described in Cassidulus lapis cancri (Encycl. pl. 143. Fig. 7.) (Table II. Fig. 2, Table XXIX. Fig. 2. α. 3 6.); through it, the lower surface of the animal is partially revealed to us. On the upper hemisphere, not completely opposite the mouth, but always a few lines to the side, is a blunt elevation, which also, and even more strongly, protrudes above the surface, likewise enclosing an opening that is closed by six touching, flat tubercles, which are sometimes closer together, sometimes further apart, and then leave a round space between them. (Table XXIX. Fig. 2 a. 2 6. Fig. 1. a and 6. Table II. Fig. 28). We must consider this opening to be the anus for now. The third opening, which is never closed, like the mouth and anus, by parts belonging to the shell, is again located on the lower hemisphere, a few lines away from the mouth and directly opposite the anus, so that the sphere takes on the appearance, as Wahlenberg already noted, as if there were two opposite, raised poles on it (Table XXIX. Fig. 2 a.), since the part of the shell that forms the edge of this opening (Table II. Fig. 21.) often protrudes as a thick bulge and thus forms a tubercle. This opening is the seat or point of attachment of a part that is not present in true echinoids, although similar structures have been observed in animals belonging to the Asteria group from the earliest formations: namely, it is the opening for the passage of a hard, calcareous stem, by which the Echinosphaerites were attached to a specific location. Just as the crinoids are nothing more than sessile, stalked Euryalids (Cuvier, Règne animal, Vol. IV, p. 12), so the Echinosphaerites are sessile, stalked echinoids. Finally, the fourth opening, which Wahlenberg considered to be the anus, we cannot interpret with certainty, since, being unfamiliar with the organization of the Echinosphaerites, we cannot find any point of reference among still-living genera. It is the smallest of all, usually round, completely open, and is located one or two lines to the side of the stem insertion, so that it forms a triangle with the stem insertion and the mouth opening, and occurs only in Echinosph. aurantium. Could it be that some organ formerly required a separate opening?
(Plate II, Fig. 21; Plate XXIX, Fig. 2a). The shell of the Echinosphaerites, like that of sea urchins, is composed of angular pieces that fit together precisely, the typical form of which is a regular hexagon. However, due to the displacement of some of these plates, pentagonal and heptagonal shapes also occur, which in turn influence the shape of the adjacent plates.

These plates are more or less striated in all specimens,
and both the direction and the nature of these striations provide a convenient means of distinguishing the already different forms from one another at first glance; in some, the plates are perforated by small pores, which are distributed with the greatest symmetry, but in a completely different way than in the known sea urchins, and probably also served here to allow the tube feet or membranous tubes to pass through; in others, we have not yet been able to discover these pores, so that for the time being we must deny their presence in these specimens, and therefore divide the Echinosphaerites into those that possess them and those that do not.

Echinosphaerites with pores. (Echinosphaerites mit Poren)
Echinosph. aurantium. Wahlenberg p. 52. Gyllenhal in Köngl.
Vet. Acad. Handl. 1772. p. 245. Tab. VIII. Fig. 4 and 5. Tab. IX.
(Tab. II. Fig. 21. Tab. XXIX. Fig. 2. a. b. Fig. 3. a. 6.)

According to Wahlenberg, this form occurs only in West Gothland in the upper shale layers, not far below the trap formation; in this area it is found in the upper and especially in the middle clayey layers of the limestone, from which it is very easy to extract.

The entire surface (Tab. XXIX. Fig. 3 a. 36.) consists of hexagonal, flat, striated shields or plates, on which a star is located, which is formed by the small holes intended for the passage of the membranous tubes. The points of this star usually correspond to the angles of the hexagon and undergo a corresponding change according to the varying shape of the plates, as the hexagon is sometimes shifted, so that, depending on whether the plates have more or fewer sides and angles, the latter are sometimes obtuse, sometimes acute, and the number of points also increases or decreases, their direction is modified accordingly, and their original shape is so altered that they themselves appear as rays emanating from a central point; compare this especially with Plate XXIX, Fig. 5, a. Each plate thus has its own ambulacra, whereas in the sea urchins still living and those found in the mountains of later formations, such as the Cretaceous, etc., only some of them participate in this formation, where they then run continuously either in a straight line from the anus to the mouth, or sit on the upper half of the shell as a so-called rose. The description of the four openings, which has already been given in general, refers particularly to this form. Their size varies greatly; they range from the size of a nut to that of an orange and are present in large numbers. We have only seen the insertion of the stem in Echinosphaerites aurantium once, and even there only a single segment of it seemed to be attached to the shell; however, we suspect that the so-called trochites or wheel stones, which are very frequently found in the limestone in our region, belong to the Echinosphaerites rather than to the actual crinoids, to which they are usually attributed, since we have never found any other trace of the latter's existence in these areas. Therefore, the segments depicted in Plate II, Figs. 17, 18, and 20 would most likely belong here.

The two following forms differ from those just mentioned partly through the greater prominence and larger size of their scales, partly through stronger and broader stripes on them, but mainly in that the arrangement of the pores in these forms has adopted a direction considered normal, which in the previous form occurred only abnormally and extremely rarely, namely, that in the most regular formation of the hexagonal scales, the pores always run alongside each other in a straight line from the raised center of each scale towards its peripheral angles.

Echinosphaerites Malum, Plate XXIX, Figs. 1. a, b and c.
Almost spherical, but rather somewhat conical, like several Galerites, as the lower surface is slightly flattened. The mouth opening is visible approximately halfway up, but more towards the lower surface. The opening in the base for the stem is very elongated in the single specimen we possess.

Echinosphaerites oblonga, Plate II, Figs. 22 and 23.

Shape elongated oval, differs from the two preceding ones in that almost the entire surface is covered with smaller and larger round pits, which probably served as attachment points for the spines, thus quite different from those still living today, in which the movable spines articulate on tubercles of the outer shell. We have not been able to properly distinguish the openings for the mouth, anus, and stem in this form, but we have placed it here because of the distribution of the pores, although the articulation pits, which are absent in all others, already suggest an approximation to later forms.

Echinosphaerites without pores.

Echin. angulosa, Plate II, Figs. 27, 28, 29. Plate XXVIII, Fig. 11.

In this and the following form, we mainly observed the presence of the stem, as we found several specimens that still had several segments of it attached. It consists of individual narrow, hollow segments, which lie on top of each other like those of the crinoids, and probably assumed various shapes depending on the different forms. The ratio of the mouth and anus is as in the previous one. Shape elongated, oval; the plates rise sharply towards their center, and the entire shell is therefore very angular. From the center of each shield, broad, raised ribs diverge towards the circumference, and unite with those that come towards them from the neighboring shield; the narrow spaces between them are filled and, as it were, latticed by raised transverse stripes.

Echinosph. striata, Plate II, Figs. 30, 31, 32. Plate XXVIII, Fig. 12.
(Echinosph. Granatum? Wahlenberg, p. 53.)

The external shape is very angular for the same reason as in the previous one. It differs from the preceding one by having larger plates and much finer longitudinal and transverse striations. Externally, there is a great similarity to the illustration given by Hisinger (Kon. Vet. Acd. Hand. 1802, Plate VII), but the position of the mouth and anus is quite different.

Echinosph. laevis, Plate II, Figs. 24, 25 and 26.

Mouth opening on the lower surface very close to the stem, surrounded by countless small warts. Anus located more opposite the mouth than the stem. Surface smooth, without longitudinal and transverse striations, but with concentric flat circles increasing in size from the center of each plate, which they surround, to the periphery, and finally, the closer they approach the circumference, the more they imitate its hexagonal shape.

The fragments depicted on Plate II, Figures 33, 34 and 35, probably belong to similar Echinosphaerites, which, judging by their curvature, must have been parts of much larger individuals; Fig. 35 shows a single displaced six-sided plate, from the center of which six sharp, protruding lamellae run in a straight line towards the corners. Fig. 33 is the upper part of another Echinosphaerite, whose plates were completely smooth and without pores. Fig. 34 differs from all the others due to the great variation in size among the touching plates; one sees two large, displaced hexagonal plates, and the others, while retaining the same shape, suddenly become much smaller.

Shouldn't the specimen depicted in Table I, Fig. 22 perhaps also belong here, about which, unfortunately, we have nothing more to say than what is visible in the three illustrations? The insertion of a stem is clearly recognizable; a segment of the latter is even still stuck in the opening intended for it. The surface is slightly convex and covered with a multitude of small pits; at first glance, it appears to represent a bivalve mollusk, but nowhere is there a separation into two parts.

Now, there remain some distinctly organically formed bodies, which, however, we have not yet been able to classify, but which we cannot ignore either, because they occur quite frequently. They are depicted on the second plate in Figs. 36-40. Could they perhaps belong to Wahlenberg's Phacites? Their shape is round, the upper and lower surfaces are slightly curved, while the sides are very strongly curved, so that they more or less approach a spherical shape. The middle of their height is usually marked by a sharp, circular, slightly raised edge, and in the center of both surfaces there is a depression, which often has a round, sometimes also a pentagonal shape, and is pierced by a small hole that passes through the entire mass and reappears on the opposite surface. The entire mass of these bodies is perfectly dense; however, when grinding them down, one can see that five diverging vertical lamellae extend from this hole towards the circumference. This, however, was the only thing we could discover about them; It is highly probable that they are in some way related to the echinospherites, since the harder parts of starfish and sea urchins usually occur in fives; however, whether they are independent entities or merely parts or segments of the stems remains undetermined for the time being.

Finally, we will only mention a fragment that is depicted in the fourth figure of the first plate. A hard outer shell is clearly visible, forming a curved tube that is wider on one side and narrower on the other, and filled with dense calcareous material. On this surface, however, nothing further can be distinguished except for very fine, raised, but unsegmented transverse striations running parallel to one another.
