P. 55

Calyx and arms of crinoids.

Nature has not established a transition from the sea urchin to the starfish, which would be a flattened sea urchin whose ventral side would be ambulacral, whose entire dorsal side would be antiambulacral, and whose interambulacral plates would consist of the simple double rows of sea urchins. The only approximation to this form is the pentagon of the pentagonal species of starfish, whose interambulacral plates always form a triangular cluster, of which only the plates at the edge of the ambulacra are arranged in a similar manner. Likewise, there is no transition from sea urchins to crinoids. In blastoids, the apex has expanded into the antiambulacral field
of the calyx. However, in the composition of the interambulacral fields of the calyx, they differ just as much from sea urchins as starfish do; in blastoids, these fields are formed partly by the 5 radial plates arranged in the direction of the radii, and partly by the interambulacral unpaired deltoid pieces, relationships that do not allow for any comparison with the interambulacral fields of sea urchins. The composition of the ambulacra is also different in Pentremites, both from the ambulacra of sea urchins and starfish, as shown by the analysis of Pentremites given by Roemer. Archiv f. Naturgesch. Vol. XVII. I. p. 323. In contrast, the position of the genital openings is consistent in Pentremites and ophiuroids, which I pointed out in the Monthly Report of the Academy 1840, p. 106.

The development of the antiambulacral side of the radii occurs
in crinoids either from the base of the calyx, or from the circumference, or near the mouth, as in most cystoids. In the last case, the calyx shows no radial arrangement of plates from the base to near the mouth, and this arrangement only begins at the mouth as oral arms, whose ambulacral grooves, however, lead to the mouth and, no less than the articulated ambulacral side of the arms, reveal the general plan of the echinoderms. This explains why the radial arrangement of the echinoderm was necessarily absent in the cystoids, as long as they were considered armless.

The distinction between the various structures that occur on the radii of crinoids is not always easy; I have attempted it below. Radii are radial divisions of the crinoid for the reception of the ambulacra, and are either calyx radii or arms. Calyx ambulacra are grooves with suckers on the ventral side of the calyx, where arms are present, in the direction of the arms. Arm ambulacra are the ventral sides of the arms and pinnules, which are provided with suckers. Blastoids have calyx ambulacra without arms. Many crinoids, such as Actinocrinus, Platycrinus, etc., have arms without calyx ambulacra, without grooves on the calyx; the Pentacrinites and related forms have arms with calyx ambulacra at the same time. The arms are either uniserially or biserially articulated; they are either simple or dichotomously branched. The branched arms therefore originate from an unbranched arm base, which is either articulated on the calyx or enclosed in the plating of the calyx. The arms are therefore not easily considered originally double. The pinnules, on the other hand, are always arranged in double rows and are never divided or branched. They are articulated extensions of either the calyx ambulacra (blastoids) or the ambulacra of the arms. Where arms are present, they are absent on the calyx (also on the ambulacral grooves of the calyx) and only begin where the arms detach from the calyx. They are either single-rowed or double-rowed and are provided with suckers on their ventral side, just like the arms and calyx ambulacra. Each simple segment of the arm or each division of the ambulacrum (blastoids) usually has only one pinnule. The pinnules then alternate. Cupressocrinus provides clear examples of arms without pinnule segmentation, while Pentremites provides examples of pinnules without arms. Single-segmented pinnules, which form rows on a segment, as on the arms of Cupressocrinus, transition into the nature of the marginal plates of the ambulacra. Marginal plates are upright plates on the sides of the ambulacral grooves and can occur on the ambulacral grooves of the calyx as well as the arms and pinnules (Pentacrinus). On the arms, they are so densely packed that several occur on a single segment. Pentacrinus has both marginal plates and pinnules. Spines or bristles are unsegmented appendages of the arms and occur only in the Crinoidea costata subdivision (Saccocoma). They are arranged in pairs, opposite each other at each articulation of the arms, while the segmented and alternating type of pinnules is absent here. Cirri are segmented appendages on the stem of crinoids and on the knob of comatulids.

The ambulacra of living crinoids are described in the treatise on Pentacrinus (Transactions of the Academy of Sciences in Berlin, 1841). They are grooves that extend from the mouth on the perisome of the calyx to the arms and pinnules, lined with a soft membrane and, in Pentacrinus, protected on both sides by upright, calcified marginal plates. Within the grooves are two rows of fine openings, on which the small suckers are situated. On the arms and pinnules, the calcareous structures on the ventral side are limited solely to the marginal plates of the ambulacral grooves. On the calyx, however, the ambulacral grooves are supported by calcareous structures in addition to the marginal plates. The plates that form the edge of the ambulacral grooves have a ridge-like elevation and serve the ambulacra both as a border and as support for the upright marginal plates; they can be called the lateral plates of the ambulacra; these, like the marginal plates, are distinguished from the other ventral plates by the absence of the enigmatic calyx pores characteristic of the latter. Beneath the soft lining of the groove are also small plates, which are already mentioned in the treatise on Pentacrinus. For a comparison with the ambulacral plates of sea urchins and starfish, it seemed important to me to subject these subambulacral plates to further investigation. They form a single, unpaired row beneath the groove membrane and are connected to the lateral plates bordering the ambulacral grooves by a firm membrane in which the ambulacral pores are located (Plate VI, Fig. 7). These pores are usually situated between the lateral and the median row of plates. On the upper surface of the median row of plates, a semicircular canal is excavated, which appears to be intended to accommodate the ambulacral vessel. According to this, the ambulacral vessel, as in the asteroids, would be located on the outer surface of the ambulacral skeleton and, as there, beneath the soft skin of the ambulacral groove; the pores of the ambulacrum connected to the tube feet could perhaps be interpreted as passages to ampullae. The presence of the calcareous plates makes examination under the microscope impossible and only allows dissection under a magnifying glass, which reveals the nature of the plates and the ambulacral pores very well, but does not allow direct observation of the relationship of the tube feet to the ambulacral vessels. The entire inner side of the calyx is loosely lined with a membrane, which again contains very small microscopic calcareous plates. For a general comparison of the ambulacra in the different orders, the fact is important that Pentacrinus possesses both median unpaired and lateral paired plates of the ambulacra, and that the ambulacral pores are located between them. The ambulacra of the Pentremites agree with this insofar as, according to the detailed analysis provided by Roemer, they also possess a median unpaired plate in addition to the paired plates, which, however, extends beneath the entire ambulacrum. The ambulacral vessel and its lateral branches, according to the pinnules discovered by Roemer and Yandell, were probably located on these plates, not beneath them, and these ambulacra were probably covered with soft skin, as in Pentacrinus. The general arrangement of the ambulacral vessels follows a consistent plan in all echinoderms, but the composition of the ambulacral skeleton and the position of the ambulacral vessels in relation to it are subject to considerable variations in the different divisions. The ambulacral plates of sea urchins, asteroids, and crinoids differ significantly from one another, as does the system of dorsal and interambulacral plating.

However, in various divisions there are certain unpaired median pieces which, where present, lie on the dorsal side of the ambulacral vessel; this series includes the subambulacral plates of Pentacrinus, the large subambulacral plate of the Pentremites, the rotulae on the jaw apparatus of sea urchins, and those pieces of the endoskeleton of holothurians through which the ambulacral canals pass to the body walls.

----- Begin section translated in 1858 E. Billings -----

Cystoids. Among the crinoids, the cystoids of L. v. Buch form a group that appeared to be distinguished by the fact that their reproductive organs were enclosed within the calyx along with the other internal organs. In Pentacrinus and Comatula, on the other hand, the reproductive organs are located on the pinnules of the arms; in those crinoids that have only one calyx opening (mouth), such as Actinocrinus, Platycrinus, etc., the exclusion of the reproductive organs from the calyx is made probable by the lack of a corresponding opening. The cystoids, however, have at least two, and in some cases three, calyx openings, one of which is distinguished by a valve closure, which is quite unusual among crinoids outside of the cystoids. This valve pyramid was identified by L. v. Buch as the genital opening. A conjecture that, however, could not be definitively proven. v. Buch in the Monthly Report of the Royal Academy of Sciences in Berlin, March 1840. Transactions of the Royal Academy of Sciences in Berlin from the year 1844. It is to his credit that he recognized the close relationship of these forms to the crinoids and at the same time their peculiarities, that he provided precise analyses of their calyx and distinguished their genera. That these are not armless, as they were formerly generally considered, was first shown by A. v. Volborth notes that he discovered the arms in Echinoencrinus angulosus and striatus, and later also in Echinosphaerites aurantium, where they originate from the mouth. Bulletin de la classe phys. math. de l'Acad. Imp. des sciences de St. Petersburg, Vol. III, No. 6. Proceedings of the Imperial Mineralogical Society of St. Petersburg, 1845-46. St. Petersburg, 1846. According to him, traces or remnants of the destroyed arms are recognizable in all Russian cystoids. The illustrations by Duke von Leuchtenberg and those by Volborth of Sphaeronites Leuchtenbergi and Protocrinites oviformis also indicate the presence of arms in these species, although the arms themselves are not preserved. Namely, branched grooves extend from the mouth over a large part of the calyx, but the branches of the grooves end at tubercles on the calyx, which are to be considered as the attachment points of the arms, which is all the more remarkable since, according to this, the arms of these cystoids must have been located far from the mouth. A specimen of Sphaeronites Leuchtenbergi in L. von Buch's collection corresponds exactly to these illustrations. When L. von Buch established the cystoids in his second treatise (1844), the arms of Echinoencrinus were already known. He did not consider them as crinoid arms and called them tentacles. With correct foresight, he already included Pseudocrinites and Agelocrinus with long arms extending from the oral part of the calyx among the cystoids, but did not want these appendages to be interpreted as true arms. In 1840, he even called the remnants of the three arm-like appendages in Hemicosmites arms or proboscis, but was led astray from the correct interpretation by the connection to oral tubes. Buch's illustrations of the calyces of the cystoids are very true to nature and accurate, whereas the apex of Hemicosmites and Sphaeronites aurantium, Abhandl. d. Akad. 1844. Plate I, figs. 11 and 21, is not correctly depicted.

In his excellent monograph on British cystoids (Mem. geol. survey, Vol. II, London, 1848), Forbes increased the number of forms with oral arms. He divides the cystoids into 1) those with arms: Pseudocrinites, Apiocystites, Agelocrinites; 2) those with oral pinnules: Prunocystites; and 3) those without arms: Caryocystites and Sphaeronites. The British Echinoencrinus are also supposed to be armless. However, it is likely that all cystoids were provided with arms or equivalents of arms. Forbes considers the arms observed by Volborth in the Russian species of Echinoencrinus to be oral pinnules. The oral arms of Echinoencrinus and Prunocystites are articulated in a double row. Volborth observed that in the former, they were covered on the ambulacral side with small plates, which he calls tentacles, noting that pinnules are absent. These plates have the characteristics of the marginal plates that occur in crinoids (Pentacrinus) on both the arms and the pinnules. In Echinoencrinus angulosus, the remains of 6 arms were present. If this number did not correspond to the 5 depressions usually surrounding the mouth, this is fully explained by the fact that the number of these facets varies; von Buch states that there are 5 or 6; I also have a specimen with 8 round depressions around the mouth, which are connected to the mouth by grooves. According to Volborth, Echinoencrinus striatus, with a much narrower, more pointed oral end of the calyx, has only 2 much stronger, opposing arms at the mouth, which are constructed in the same way as in Echinoencrinus angulosus. This behavior makes it probable that these are not pinnules, but arms, since it is not characteristic of pinnules to stand alone. If they both belong to a single ambulacrum, how is one to imagine a single ambulacrum at this location in the immediate vicinity of the mouth opening? But if they belong to two different ambulacra, then, because they are separate, they can only be arms.

The arms of Echinosphaerites aurantium Wahlenb. (Sphaeronites aurantium His.) behave essentially exactly as Volborth described and illustrated them. In well-preserved specimens that I have before me, the beginnings of three articulated arms are visible at the oral part of the calyx. The five uppermost calyx plates rise to form a three-sided pyramid, truncated at the top, whose blunted edges extend into the arms. Two sides of the pyramid are wider than the third. The sutures of the five plates are arranged such that two of them lie on the wider sides of the pyramid, while the remaining three fall into the blunted edges. In addition to the five main plates of the pyramid, there are also two supplementary plates, which extend from the calyx into two of the edge sutures. All seven plates participate in the pore rhomboids of the calyx plates only along their lower circumference. The arms immediately divide again. Very fine grooves extend from the center across the arms. These grooves are covered with marginal plates. The marginal plates, however, are so closely joined at the center that the assumption of an oral opening at this point is not based on direct observation; only specimens with an incomplete apex show a wide opening of the calyx in the middle of the apex. The division of the arms, moreover, proves that these are indeed arms, not pinnules. Whether these arms, like the arms of some other cystoids, such as Pseudocrinites, were provided with articulated pinnules cannot be determined, as they are broken off at the stems. That Caryocystites also possess arms is not yet known; however, this cannot be doubted, since they are generally indistinguishable from Echinosphaerites.

In Hemicosmites, the apex, above and between the uppermost large calyx plates, possesses a three-branched field of small plates, whose branches extend towards the broken arms (Plate VI, Fig. 4); however, if these plates have fallen off, the apex shows a large three-branched fissure in the calyx, which is enclosed by the uppermost row of large calyx plates (Plate VI, Fig. 5). Of the 6 uppermost plates of the calyx, 3 are provided with an incision that belongs to the three-branched opening. Each of these incisions continues into a groove; the groove leads, sometimes wider, sometimes narrower, to a raised facet of the calyx, which served for the insertion of an arm. This elevation is no longer located on the plates of the uppermost row, but on 3 of the plates of the second row, and is only found in specimens that are not abraded, being particularly well-preserved in a specimen that Mr. Ewald shared with me. The three-branched fissure of the calyx and the continuing grooves of the calyx are thus covered with small plates that easily fall off. In the specimen illustrated by L. von Buch, they are still complete and form a fine, flat plating extending from the center towards the ventral side of the three arms, completely covering the three-branched fissure of the uppermost calyx plates visible in other specimens. Although the small plates are closely joined together, they are clearly separated from each other by recessed lines of contact. Among these lines of contact, three can be distinguished that are directed from the center towards the three arms, from the other lines of contact, which are oriented transversely to these three longitudinal lines of contact. An opening in the center is not visible. These three lines are reminiscent of the grooves of Echinosphaerites aurantium; they correspond to the underlying fissures of the large calyx plates.

Hemicosmites and Caryocrinus are so similar in their calyx and its pores, apart from the position of the arms, that one is easily tempted to consider them as closely related. In Caryocrinus, the lateral mouth appears to be the only opening of the calyx, and this is remarkably provided with a valvular pyramid. Indeed, von Buch considered it to be the mouth, while the similar valvular pyramid of the cystoids was identified by him as a genital opening. Could it be that Hemicosmites is also closed at the apex, and that the aforementioned plates on the apex between the arms, instead of having a gap between them, actually abut each other? In this case, the laterally positioned opening of Hemicosmites, which in von Buch's specimen is closed with a valvular pyramid, would be comparable to the valvular pyramid of Caryocrinus and would represent the actual mouth. This interpretation would cast doubt on the identification of the mouth opening in Sphaeronites and in all cystoids, such that the opening closed with a valvular pyramid could everywhere be a laterally positioned mouth. However, this view is contradicted by the fact that the grooves from the center of the apex to the arms are very distinctly developed in Sphaeronites Leuchtenbergi Volb. and Protocrinites oviformis Eichw., and that the straight lines of the fine grooves on the apex of Echinosphaerites aurantium, where the plates of both sides adjoin, are extremely favorable to the interpretation of a mouth slit located between them in the center. The structure of Pseudocrinus and Echinoencrinus can also be cited in support of this.

In the always very worn specimens of Cryptocrinites cerasus, no traces of arms have yet been observed.

Forbes considers the cystoids, like the blastoids, as divisions of echinoderms distinct from crinoids. The Sphaeronites were already classified as crinoids because of their stem, even before their arms were known, and there is even more reason to do so now. Volborth and Roemer consider the cystoids as a group of crinoids, and this is also my view. However, the position of the arms should not be included among their characteristics. For in Sphaeronites Leuchtenbergi and Protocrinites oviformis, the arms were located far from the mouth, similar to those of other crinoids.

The tube feet of the cystoids undoubtedly, as in Pentacrinus, were located on the ambulacral side of the arms and calyx grooves. However, in the introduction to this treatise, it has been shown how contrary to all analogy it would be for any echinoderm to have tube feet on the anti-ambulacral side of the perisome, from the apical end to the arms and between the ambulacral radii. In the cystoids, therefore, the entire calyx, with the exception of the calyx grooves, is to be considered anti-ambulacral.

The genera Pentacrinus, Caryocrinus, and most cystoids are distinguished among the crinoids by very peculiar pores in the non-ambulacral plates of the calyx. We have only had the opportunity to study these pores more closely in Pentacrinus. I have described and illustrated them in the treatise on Pentacrinus. Transactions of the Academy, 1841, p. 225, Plate II, fig. 14a, Plate III, fig. 1.

The interambulacral (both interpalmar and intrapalmar) calyx pores of Pentacrinus perforate the ventral calyx plates and lead beneath the inner calyx membrane; They are without any soft extensions to the outside. In contrast to the ambulacral cup pores for tube feet, they can be called anambulacral cup pores. Their function is unknown; it is only certain that they are not passages for suckers. A comparison with the respiratory pores of starfish, from which soft tubules project outwards, is tempting; however, Ehrenberg proved, and I can confirm this with my own observations, that these tubules are blind sacs that, while connected to the body cavity, are completely closed to the outside.

The calyx pores of Caryocrinus are also unrelated to the arms and therefore resemble, although differently distributed, the anambulacral calyx pores of Pentacrinus. They occupy the antiambulacral part of the calyx behind the arms down to the base.

Most cystoids (with the exception of Cryptocrinites cerasus) have calyx pores that are distributed over a larger or smaller part of the calyx without radiation and in a very peculiar manner. In forms with calyx grooves, such as Protocrinites and Sphaeronites Leuchtenbergi, these pores are again anambulacral, as they are located in the fields outside and between the ambulacral grooves, similar to the anambulacral pores of Pentacrinus; however, their distribution is much greater here, as they extend to the base.

Two main differences have become known based on the distribution and connection of these pores:

I. Cystoids with pore rhombuses. The pores are arranged in rhombic figures, one half of which belongs to one plate, the other half to the adjacent plate. Two pores of these rhombuses always seem to be connected to each other by canals or grooves, which are visible either on the outer or inner side of the plates, such that the connected pores belong to two different, adjacent plates.

a. Pore rhombuses without external connection of the pores: Hemicosmites like Caryocrinus; in Hemicosmites, according to Volborth, the connecting grooves are on the inner side of the plates.

b. In Echinosphaerites granatum Wahlenb. (Caryocystites granatum v. B.), the pores are connected by externally protruding ridges, which contain the connecting canal of the pores, and this canal is always a single one between every two pores or even a row of pores. Since this species is the type of the genus Caryocystites v. B., this circumstance is of importance. This circumstance is all the more important because the number of plates in the calyx, even the basal plates, varies in Caryocystites granatum, so that some specimens have more calyx plates stacked on top of each other than others, and specimens with five basal plates are not uncommon. According to the arrangement of the plates, in my opinion, Caryocystites and Echinosphaerites would be indistinguishable. This is of particular importance. Other Echinosphaerites or forms derived from Echinosphaerites have several connecting canals.

(above ends for now at beginning of p. 65, not complete)

------

p. 90-something?

Crinoids.

The genus of cystoids, Stephanocrinus Conrad, is described by Roemer
in Archiv f. Naturgesch. XVI. Jahrg. 1, p. 365, Taf. V. Kidney-shaped tubercles at the ends of the rays of the star-shaped field on the apical surface indicate the presence of arms.

Agelacrinus agrees with the cystoids in possessing a valvular pyramid, but according to Roemer, it is unstalked, the sessile base of the calyx is uncalcified, and without plates. Roemer's observations also differ from the view of the arms of this genus established by Forbes. Proceedings of the Natural History Society of the Prussian

Rhineland and Westphalia, VIII. Year, Bonn 1851, p. 370. According to Roemer, the radii of Agelacrinus lie entirely at the level of the surface of the disc and are immovably fused with the adjacent plates; therefore, there are no movable arms, but rather radial fields, areas comparable to the radii of the Pentremites. The radii were also imprinted on the impression of the inner surface of the shell of A. rhenanus.


