Ipsa instituti ratio divisioni in Mollusca & Testacea aliquantum immorari jubet. Ordine Molluscorum comprehenduntur animalia nuda (absque testa) artubus instructa.  Ex hac sola differentia animalia alioquin simillima diversis ordinibus ad nutum Naturae subjici posse vix persvadeor.  Haec dum insecta elytris aut alis vel utroque vestita cum aliis, quae his tegumentis carent, copula jungit, innuere videtur, notas has vel maxime diversum sexum, speciem vel genus, minime vero classem, vel ordinem constituere, minusque recte sub diversis ordinibus comparere, quae specie vel ut plurimum genere natura tantum differre voluit.  Quid enim Testacea, nisi Mollusca testa instructa, & quid Mollusca, nisi Testacea testa distituta?  Exactissima convenientia hospitum testarum univalvium, quas Helices vocant, cum Limacibus nudis, & bivalvium non spernenda cum Ascidiis, errorque majorum, qui Limaces testas suas deserere dicunt, exinde natus, proximam affinitatem probant.  Transitus praeterea Naturae spectabilis a Limace nudo ad testaceum per species intermedias, nudas nempe lapillum seu rudimentum testae intus gestantes, & Buccinum glutinosum, novam speciem infra describendam, testa membranacea sub pallio carnoso latente instructum, nostram sententiam tueri videtur.  Igitur, quin posterae aetates, quae natura juncta volnit, conjungant nullus dubito, Limacesque nudos ideo & testa instructos seu Cochleas, quos autores diversis ordinibus seposuere, animalculaque rotatoria nuda & testacea, quae tamen iidem, licet natura intervallo ea removerat, uno eodemque genere, junxere, eiden ordini, diverso generi adseribo; contra Cytherem, Lynceum, & Daphnem g), quae, si testas respicis, conchis aeu Vermibus, si vero rectius inhabitantem, insectis ammumeranda sunt, Familiae Monoculorum jungo.

-> 

The very reason for the institution requires us to dwell somewhat on the division into Mollusca and Testacea. The order Mollusca includes naked animals (without a shell) equipped with limbs. From this difference alone I am hardly convinced that animals that are otherwise very similar can be subjected to different orders at the behest of Nature. While this couplet joins insects covered with elytra or wings or both with others that lack these integuments, it seems to suggest that these characters constitute either a very different sex, species or genus, but not a class or order, and less correctly to be compared under different orders, which nature has intended to differ only in species or at most in genus. For what is Testacea, if not Mollusca equipped with a shell, and what is Mollusca, if not Mollusca without a Testacea shell? The most exact agreement of the univalve shells that they host, which they call Helices, with naked Slugs, and the bivalve with Ascidians, should not be despised, and the error of the elders, who say that Slugs abandon their shells, proves the close affinity that arose from this.Moreover, Nature's remarkable transition from the naked Slug to the shelled one through intermediate species, namely the naked ones carrying a stone or rudiment of a shell inside, and the glutinous whelk, a new species to be described below, equipped with a membranous shell under a fleshy mantle, seems to support our opinion. Therefore, I doubt not that later ages will join together, which nature has willed to join, and therefore the naked Slugs and equipped with a shell or Snails, which authors have placed in different orders, and the naked and shelled rotifers, which are nevertheless the same, although nature had removed them at intervals, they have joined in one and the same genus, I assign to the same order, to a different genus; against Cytherea, Lynceus, and Daphne (g), which, if you look at the shells, are to be reckoned with shells or Worms, but if more directly inhabiting them, with insects, I assign to the Family Monocots.

---------

Uterque mirandorum feracissimus nova animalium oeconomia; facultate praesertim generandi & reproducendi insuecta phaenomenisque, quae nos quovis passii attonitos redunt, CREATOREM alta voce loquitur.

Nec haec diviso sine labe; sensu enim latiori cirri Hydrae & Tubulariae, rostrum Naidis proboscideae, Collaque Vibrionum Anseris, Oloris &c. piliantici Trichodae, ciliaqne Brachioni & Vorticellae tentacula dici possunt.

Increscente indies numero Infusoriorum aliam tentavi, vermes fluviales  & terrestres ex maxima indolis convenientia in Infusoria, Helmenthica & Testacea disponens. Verum & heic supersunt & semper invenientur, quamvis dispositionem, si exactissimum verborum significatum attendas, respuentia; sic Vorticellarum quaedam vix infusoriae, Fasciolarum vero aliae vere infusoriae; Limaces nudi, licet testa non instruantur, a testaceis tamen removeri nequeunt; Tubularium vero inter fluviales, quae sese ulli obnoxiam aegre praebet, stationem Hydrae, cum qua plura communia habet, sequi jussi.

->

Both the most fruitful of the wonderful new animal economy; especially the ability to generate and reproduce, and the phenomena that return us astonished at every moment, speak loudly of the CREATOR.

And these are not divided without fault; for in a broader sense the cirri of Hydra and Tubularia, the beak of Naidis proboscidea, the Colla of Vibrios of Anseri, Oloris &c. pilianticus of Trichoda, cilia or Brachioni and Vorticella can be called tentacles.

As the number of Infusoria increases daily, I have attempted another, arranging river and terrestrial worms according to the greatest agreeableness of character into Infusoria, Helmenthica and Testacea. But here and there they remain and will always be found, although the arrangement, if you pay attention to the most exact meaning of the words, rejects; thus some of the Vorticella are hardly infusoria, but others of the Fasciola are truly infusoria; naked slugs, although they are not equipped with a shell, cannot nevertheless be removed from the Testacea; But among the rivers, which hardly show themselves subject to anyone, I ordered them to follow the station of Hydra, with which they have many things in common.
