Lamarck 1815

SUPPLEMENT
To the general classification of Animals [Introduction, page 342], concerning the actual order of formation relative to these beings.

According to recent observations made by Messrs. Savigny, Lesueur, and Desmarets, on animals that had mostly been considered as polyps, I find myself obliged to create a new division that seems to me unable to belong to any of the classes already established in the animal kingdom.

The consideration of this new division, which I provisionally place after the radiates, but which does not appear to be a continuation or a derivative of them, has made me realize the necessity of distinguishing the single and simple series that we are forced to create to facilitate our studies of animals, from the real or actual order of the production of these beings, an order subject to causes that have modified its simplicity.

If the simple series that should constitute our general classification of animals is composed of a sequence of masses arranged according to the progression that occurs in the composition of the different animal organizations, then it will present the very order of nature, that is to say, the one that nature would have executed if accidental causes had not modified its operations. Thus, when we have perfected this series, and have appropriately divided it, it will offer us the only natural method that it is appropriate for us to use.

However, this simple series is not entirely consistent with the order in which nature has produced the different animals; for this order is far from simple; it is branched and even appears to be composed of several distinct series.

I have presented (p. 342) the general classification of animals, offering a single and simple series, such as the one we are compelled to use. I have nothing to change in it, except perhaps to increase the number of classes; but I add to it, after the radiates, the new division in question, which encompasses what I call the ascidians.

Here, I limit myself to presenting the actual order of the production of animals, as it appears to me, and which I call the order of formation. But, first and foremost, I must demonstrate that this order of formation is not illusory, and that it is clearly indicated by the relationships, and consequently by nature itself.

Until now, it seems to me that naturalists have seen in the relationships between objects only a means of grouping these objects according to the magnitude of these relationships, and of forming with these grouped objects various segments of a series, which they then arranged among themselves according to the greater or lesser relationships they perceived between these particular segments or masses.

Their work in this regard resulted in the establishment of a general series composed of all these particular portions or series, more or less appropriately placed. However, in carrying out this distribution, naturalists were led to place only the most disparate objects at the two ends of the series, in short, those furthest apart from each other in terms of the composition and perfection of the organization of these beings.

Although simple and easy to grasp, the consequence of this necessity nevertheless seems to have gone unnoticed; for naturalists saw in their distribution only an order based on relationships; and yet it also presented them with an order of formation of the greatest clarity.

One more step remained to be taken: it was the most important one, the very one that could best enlighten us about the operations of nature. It was simply a matter of recognizing that the portions of the general series that comprise objects appropriately grouped by their relationships are themselves only portions of the order of formation with respect to these objects.

This step has been taken; the order of the successive formation of different animals can no longer be contested; it will have to be recognized.

But this order is not simple and could not have been; accidental causes have necessarily modified it here and there. Indeed, the consideration of the lateral branches that one is forced to recognize in it, and even that of its division into at least two particular series, attest that it has been strongly subjected to the influence of modifying causes that have brought it to the state in which we observe it.

I can effectively show that the order of the production of animals was initially unique, forming a series with a few branches, and that subsequently, as soon as a certain number of animals had come into existence, particular circumstances gave rise to the formation of another series, also branched and well-characterized. The order of production in question was thus divided into two separate series, each having a few simple branches. Perhaps there are still others; but I think that the two series I am about to describe will suffice to explain what we now know about animals.

To illustrate the basis of this peculiar order of things, I will say that I consider it a factual truth that when nature operates under diverse circumstances or on materials of a dissimilar nature, its products are necessarily different.

I have already pointed out that in forming living bodies, it had occasion to operate on materials of two different kinds; which forced it, with one type of material, to create only plants, while with the other, it was able to form animals. (See Introduction, pp. 126 and 179.)

Now, in giving existence to the animal kingdom, we see that it necessarily began with the series of infusoria, which immediately leads to all the polyps; that this series, after having provided the lateral branch of the radiates, continues by leading to the ascidians, then the acephalans, which can be considered a classic division, and finally, the mollusks limited to those that have a head, if indeed the cephalopods do not yet deserve to be classified separately.

We also see that, a considerable time after the institution of infusoria and polyps, nature began the establishment of a new series (that of worms), using particular materials found within already existing animals, and that with these materials it formed spontaneous generations which are the source of intestinal worms, some of which, perhaps, having passed outside, may have given rise to external worms.

Indeed, the great disparity in organization exhibited by the animals belonging to the class of worms attests, as I have said (excerpt, etc., p. 39), that the most imperfect of these animals are due to spontaneous generations, and that worms truly constitute a particular series, posterior in origin to the one begun by the infusoria.

I had already recognized and announced this particular branch or series that worms appear to form, when Mr. Latreille, sharing his reflections on this subject with me, told me that he was convinced that the epizoa, insects, etc., originated from this same branch.

Thus, strengthened by the opinion of this scholar, which I share, I consider the order of animal production as formed of two distinct series.

These two series differ so much from each other that, among the animals that each of them encompasses, when the nervous system is established and somewhat developed, we see, in each series, that its mode is entirely different.

In the series that begins with infusoria and ends with mollusks, the nervous system nowhere presents a medullary cord that is ganglionated or nodular along its length, while the other series, which begins with worms, presents, wherever the nervous system is capable of giving rise to sensation, a medullary cord that is nodular or ganglionated along its length.

Thus, I submit to the consideration of zoologists the presumed order of the formation of animals, as expressed in the following table:

The ORDER is characterized by the formation of the animals, offering two separate, branched series.

[DIAGRAM]

However we approach it, I am convinced that we will never succeed, in the simple series that should constitute our general classification of animals, in offering truly natural transitions everywhere between the distinct groups, and consequently, in preserving in all ranks the relationships that result from the order of production of these beings. Thus, our simple series will always offer only interrupted and unequal portions of this order, between which we will interpose other portions out of sequence, choosing those that the degree of complexity of the organization of the animals they encompass makes less disparate. It is evident that these interposed portions can only be out of sequence, and must form anomalies in the simple series, if they belong either to a lateral branch or to a particular series.

It would indeed be difficult to link the crustaceans to the annelids by a truly nuanced transition; and yet the annelids had to be placed after the crustaceans in the simple series of our general classification. It is therefore clear that, in the series in question, the annelids, although well placed, are out of sequence, and it can be presumed that they originally originated from worms.

After the epizoans, the insects, which seem to originate from them, are not linked by a continuous transition either to the arachnids, even those that are antenniferous and hexapod, or to the crustaceans. We see here two branches whose source is lost in a kind of hiatus.

On the one hand, the Podura, the Forficula, and then the myriapods seem to lead to the woodlice, Caprellidae, etc., and offer the origin of the crustaceans, in the series of which the Entomostraca form a small lateral branch. On the other hand, hexapod parasites, such as lice and ticks, seem to lead to pycnogonids and acarids, then to phalangids, scorpionids, and finally to web-spinning arachnids. This series then has no further continuation and appears to constitute a lateral branch, whose origin is close to that of crustaceans, without offering any known point of connection with them, or even with insects.

Finally, crustaceans lead to cirripeds through fairly close relationships, but without a true transition. This is where the series of articulated animals ends, and where they only begin to be consistently articulated when the nervous system is sufficiently developed to present a ganglionated spinal cord along its length.

Regarding the other series, it appears very natural, less branched, and does not include any animal with articulated parts. I believe it should be divided into a greater number of classical divisions; for not only is one needed for ascidians and another for acephalans, but I also think it is appropriate to separate cephalopods from mollusks, because of the particular features of their form and organization. Cephalopods would therefore terminate the series of inarticulate animals, leaving aside the heteropods, which are still too little known.

This is all I perceive regarding the order of production of invertebrate animals.

Now, how can we connect these animals to vertebrates through a true transition? Certainly, this transition is not yet known. I suspected that heteropods might one day provide it, if we manage to discover others that I presume exist.

These problems will undoubtedly remain unsolved for a long time; but we can already think that, in its production of different animals, nature has not executed a single and simple series.

However great these difficulties may be, stemming from the many observations we still lack, and whatever the inevitable irregularities of our simple series, the considerations that may arise from these objects do not in any way affect the principle of the successive production of different animals.

Indeed, this principle consists in the fact that, after the spontaneous generations that initiated each particular series, the animals have subsequently all originated from one another. Now, although the laws that governed this production are everywhere and invariably the same, the diverse circumstances in which nature operated during the course of its work have necessarily led to anomalies in the simplicity of the scale resulting from all its operations.

We must therefore work on the composition and refinement of two different tables; namely:

One presenting the simple series that we must use in our works and in our courses, to characterize, distinguish, and make known the observed animals; a series that we will generally base on the progression that occurs in the composition of the different animal organizations, considering each one in the totality of its parts, and using the precepts I have proposed.

The other presenting the particular series, with their simple branches, which nature seems to have formed in producing the different animals that currently exist. This second table, free from the errors that may have crept into the one I have just presented, will undoubtedly be useful for our instruction, will clarify many things that we can only understand through its use, and, in the animal kingdom, will probably advance our knowledge of nature.

If the study of nature can hold any interest for us, I have reason to believe that what has just been presented will not be without importance.

-----

Note: The necessity of working strictly with printing methods, which does not allow for the obliquity that would have been necessary to give to the lines indicating the lateral branches of the series in order to show their starting point, means that the idea I wanted to convey through the table is somewhat distorted; however, the accompanying text seems to compensate for this defect and restore the intended meaning.

End of Supplement.
