The name Echinus seems to have been derived from the spines, which cannot be held because of them, by antiphrasis. vid. Gunnerus de aguat. pag. 415. Muf. Calceolar. p. 84, ALDROVANDVS has collected many other meanings of Echinus: vid. Eiusd.de Auimall. exanguibus. Cap. XL, p. m. 400. which I judge superfluous to mention here.

Here I would like to indicate the main differences of other recent ones.

Cl. Breynius in. Schediasm. de Echinis, all Echinus, according to the position of the mouth and anus, reduces to seven genera: which are

Echimometra, whose mouth opening is in the center of the base, but the anus is inverted, the mouth opposite in diameter. It is the Cidaris Kleini.

r. Cidares, Gallic. Turbans, are hemispherical or spherical in shape.

I received the specimen, which Klein took care to paint, from the Dresden Museum, and I saw that this Echinite did not deserve the name of a new species. For the Echinites are of a certain Cidaris veriolatae or of a lesser Cidaris Diadematis §15.p.36. or of a Cidaris rupestris. The striae themselves, which immediately surround the tubercles, are not so long, nor so manifest in the Echinite, as they are painted in the icon, — They seem to arise from the same folds, which can sometimes be observed on the margin of the larger eminences. These tiny striae, like slightly excavated fulcrums, are directed towards the apex of the tubercle. —However, the form of this Echinite is orbicular, e: depres. The larger eminences are surrounded by other smaller granules in a circle. The shell itself has been changed into a calcareous space and the nucleus is filled with chalk. I did not receive any information.

If there is any icon given by KLEIN, this seems to me to represent Echinus Lucuntrum LIINN.; for, which is cited by LINNAEUS, it agrees neither with the description nor with the synonyms.
LINNAEUS gives this definition of the same in his Systema Naturae.

E. hemi-spherical ovate, with curved ambulacris, with muricated areas: narrower longitudinal ones.

But these characters are hardly sufficient; it therefore differs from other neighboring species.

The first species is Linnaeus' Echinus esculentus, Systema Naturae ed. XII. p. 1102. *) which he calls hemispherical-globosum; ambulacris; with obsoletely warty areas. In Fauna Svecica p. 513. Linnaeus attributes a flat vertex to this species, which Rumpheus, however, completely repudiates, who calls it with an elevated vertex, which even the inspection of Echinus teaches. — In Muf. Lud. Viricae p. 7o. This description is given: 22/4 hemiphaeric- fubglobofa, red, puncti.callofis obfoletis adfperia. —4tmiulacra 10, ferie multiplici porerum, ordinibus oblique, in fingula fex. —4reolae zaiores vndique adfperfae verrucis exoletis, ad bain magis prominent bus. Caret linea lateralis flexuofa ad angulos pore. Zrec/se mimores, doubly anguftiores, fimiles. —Apertura regularis, fubrotunda, nec io filuris notata. pizae violaceae, apice albac.
